arXiv:1005.5232v2  [cs.OH]  31 May 2010
Towards MKM in the Large: Modular Representation
and Scalable Software Architecture ⋆
Michael Kohlhase, Florian Rabe, Vyacheslav Zholudev
Computer Science, Jacobs University Bremen
{m.kohlhase,f.rabe,v.zholudev}@jacobs-university.de
Abstract. MKM has been deﬁned as the quest for technologies to manage math-
ematical knowledge. MKM “in the small” is well-studied, so t he real problem
is to scale up to large, highly interconnected corpora: “MKM in the large”. We
contend that advances in two areas are needed to reach this go al. We need rep-
resentation languages that support incremental processing of all primitive MKM
operations, and we need software architectures and impleme ntations that imple-
ment these operations scalably on large knowledge bases.
We present instances of both in this paper: the M MT framework for modular
theory-graphs that integrates meta-logical foundations, which forms the base of
the next OMD OC version; and TNTBase, a versioned storage system for XML-
based document formats. TNTBase becomes an M MT database by instantiating
it with special MKM operations for MMT.
1 Introduction
[
12] deﬁnes the objective of MKM to be to develop new and better ways of managing
mathematical knowledge using sophisticated software tools and later states the “Grand
Challenge of MKM” as a universal digital mathematics library (UDML) , which is in-
deed a grand challenge, as it envisions that the UDML would continuously grow and
in time would contain essentially all mathematical knowled ge, which is estimated to
be well in excess of 107 published pages. 1 All current efforts towards comprehensive
machine-organizable libraries of mathematics are at least three orders of magnitude
smaller than the UDML envisioned by Farmer in 2004: Formal li braries like those of
Mizar ([33], Isabelle ([26]) or PVS ([25]) have ca.104.x statements (deﬁnitions and the-
orems). Even the semi-formal, commercial Wolfram MathWorld which hails itself the
world’s most extensive mathematics resourceonly has 104.1 entries. There is anecdotal
evidence that already at this size, management procedures are struggling.
To meet the MKM Grand Challenge will have to develop fundamentally more scal-
able ways of dealing with mathematical knowledge, especial ly since [ 12] goes on to
postulate that the UDML would also be continuously reorganized and consolidated as
new connections and discoveries were made . Clearly this can only be achieved algo-
rithmically; experience with the libraries cited above alr eady show that manual MKM
⋆ The ﬁnal publication of this paper is available at www.springerlink.com.
1 For instance, Zentralblatt Math contains 2.4 million abstr acts of articles form mathematical
journals in the last 100 years.
does not scale sufﬁciently. Most of the work in the MKM community has concentrated
on what we could call “MKM in the small”, i.e. dealing with asp ects of MKM that do
not explicitly address issues of very large knowledge collections; these we call “MKM
in the large”.
In this paper we contribute to the MKM Grand Challenge of doin g formal “MKM
in the large” by analyzing scalability challenges inherent in MKM and propose steps
towards solutions based on our M MT format, which is the basis for the next version of
OMD OC. We justify our conclusions and recommendations for scalab ility techniques
with concrete case studies we have undertaken in the last years. Section 2 tackles scal-
ability issues pertaining to the representation languages used in the formalization of
mathematical knowledge. Section 3 discusses how the modularity features of MMT can
be realized scalably by realizing basic MKM functionality l ike validation, querying,
and presentation incrementally and carefully evaluating the on-the-ﬂy computation (and
caching) of induced representations. These considerations, which are mainly concerned
with efﬁcient computation “in memory” are complemented wit h a discussion of mass
storage, caching, and indexing in Section 4, which addresses scalability issues in large
collections of mathematical knowledge. Section 5 concludes the paper and addresses
avenues of further research.
2 A Scalable Representation Language
Our representation language M MT was introduced in [
29]. It arises from three cen-
tral design goals. Firstly, it should provide an expressive but simple module system as
modularity is a necessary requirement for scalability. As u sual in language design, the
goals of simplicity and expressivity form a difﬁcult trade- off that must be solved by
identifying the right primitive module constructs. Secondly, scalability across semantic
domains requires foundation-independence in the sense that M MT does not commit
to any particular foundation (such as Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory or Church’s higher-
order logic). Providing a good trade-off between this level of generality and the ability
to give a rigorous semantics is a unique feature of M MT. Finally, scalability across
implementation domains requires standards-compliance, and while using XML and
OPEN MATH is essentially orthogonal to the language design, the use of URIs as iden-
tiﬁers is not as it imposes subtle constraints that can be very hard to meet a posteriori.
MMT represents logical knowledge on three levels: On the module level, M MT
builds on modular algebraic speciﬁcation languages for logical knowledge such as OBJ
[14], ASL [32], development graphs [1], and CASL [7]. In particular, MMT uses theo-
ries and theory morphism as the primitive modular concepts. Contrary to them, M MT
only imposes very lightweight assumptions on the underlying language. This leads to a
very simple generic module system that subsumes almost all a spects of the syntax and
semantics of speciﬁc module systems such as PVS [25], Isabelle [26], or Coq [3].
On the symbol level, MMT is a simple declarative language that uses named sym-
bol declarations where symbols may or may not have a type or a d eﬁniens. By experi-
mental evidence, this subsumes virtually all declarative l anguages. In particular, M MT
uses the Curry-Howard correspondence [8,17] to represent axioms and theorem as con-
stants, and proofs as terms. Sets of symbol declarations yie ld theories and correspond
to OPEN MATH content dictionaries.
On the object level, M MT uses the formal grammar of O PEN MATH [6] to rep-
resent mathematical objects without committing to a speciﬁ c formal foundation. The
semantics of objects is given proof theoretically using judgments for typing and equal-
ity between objects. M MT is parametric in these judgments, and the precise choice is
relegated to a foundation.
2.1 Module System
Sophisticated mathematical reasoning usually involves several related but different math-
ematical contexts, and it is desirable to exploit these relationships by moving theorems
between contexts. It is well-known that modular design can r educe space to an extent
that is exponential in the depth of the reuse relation betwee n the modules, and this ap-
plies in particular to the large theory hierarchies employed in mathematics and computer
science.
The ﬁrst applications of this technique in mathematics are f ound in the works by
Bourbaki ([
4,5]), which tried to prove every theorem in the context with the smallest
possible set of axioms. MMT follows the “little theories approach” proposed in [11], in
which separate contexts are represented by separate theories, and structural relation-
ships between contexts are represented as theory morphisms, which serve as conduits
for passing information (e.g., deﬁnitions and theorems) be tween theories (see [ 10]).
This yields theory graphs where the nodes are theories and the paths are theory mor-
phisms.
Example 1 (Algebra). For example, consider the theory graph in Fig.
1 for a portion
of algebra, which was formalized in M MT in [9]. It deﬁnes the theory of magmas (A
magma has a binary operation without axioms.) and extends itsuccessively to monoids,
groups, and commutative groups. Then the theory of rings is formed by importing from
both CGroup (for the additive operation) and Monoid (for the multiplicative operation).
A crucial property here is that the imports are named, e.g., Monoid imports from
Magma via an import named mag. While redundant in some cases, it is essential in Ring
where we have to distinguish two theory morphisms from Monoid to Ring: The com-
position add/grp/mon for the additive monoid andmult for the multiplicative monoid.
The import names are used to form qualiﬁed names for the impor ted symbols. For
example, if ∗ is the name of the binary operation in Magma, then add/grp/mon/mag/∗
denotes addition and mult/mag/∗ multiplication in Ring. Of course, M MT supports
the use of abbreviations instead of qualiﬁed names, but it is a crucial prerequisite for
scalability to make qualiﬁed names the default: Without named imports, every time we
add a new name in Magma (e.g, for an abbreviation or a theorem), we would have to add
corresponding renamings in Ring to avoid name clashes.
Another reason to use named imports is that we can use them to instantiate imports
with theory morphisms. In our example, distributivity is st ated separately as a theory
that imports two magmas. Let us assume, the left distributivity axiom is stated as
∀x, y, z.x mag1/∗ (y mag2/∗ z) = ( x mag1/∗ y) mag2/∗ (x mag1/∗ z)
Then the import dist from Distrib to Ring will carry the instantiations mag1 ↦→
mult/mag and mag2 ↦→ add/grp/mon/mag.
In other module systems such as SML, such instantiations are called (asymmetric)
sharing declarations. In terms of theory morphism, their se mantics is a commutative
diagram, i.e., an equality between two morphisms such as dist/mag1 = mult/mag :
Magma → Ring. This provides M MT users and systems with a module level invariant
for the efﬁcient structuring of large theory graphs.
Besides imports, which induce theory morphisms into the con taining theory, there
is a second kind of edge in the theory graph: Views are explici t theory morphisms that
represent translations between two theories. For example, the node on the right side of
the graph represents a theory for the integers, say declaring the constants 0, +, − , 1, and
·. The fact that the integers are a commutative group is repres ented by the view v1: If
we assume that Monoid declares a constant e for the unit element and Group a constant
inv for the inverse element, then v1 carries the instantiations grp/mon/mag/∗ ↦→ +,
grp/mon/e ↦→ 1, and grp/inv ↦→ − . Furthermore, every axiom declared or imported
in CGroup is mapped to a proof of the corresponding property of the integers.
The view v2 extends v1 with corresponding instantiations for multiplication. MMT
permits modular views as well: When deﬁning v2, we can import all instantiations of
v1 using add ↦→ v1. As above, the semantics of such an instantiation is a commutative
diagram, namely v2 ◦ add = v1 as intended.
Magma Monoid Group CGroup
RingDistrib Integers
mag mon grp
addmultmag1 mag2
dist
v1
v2
Fig. 1. Algebraic Hierarchy
The major advantage of modu-
lar design is that every declaration
— abbreviations, theorems, nota-
tions etc. — effects induced dec-
larations in the importing theo-
ries. A disadvantage is that decla-
rations may not always be located
easily, e.g., the addition in a ring is
declared in a theory that is four imports away. MMT ﬁnds a compromise here: Through
qualiﬁed names, all induced declarations are addressable a nd locatable. The process
of removing the modularity by adding all these induced decla rations to all theories is
called ﬂattening.
Case Study 1: The formalization in [
9] uses the Twelf module system ([31]), which
is a special case of MMT. Twelf automatically computes the ﬂattened theory graph. The
modular theory graph including all axioms and proofs can be w ritten in 180 lines of
Twelf code. The ﬂattened graph is computed in less than half a second and requires
more than 1800 lines.
The same case study deﬁnes two theories for lattices, one bas ed on orderings and
one based on algebra, and gives mutually inverse views to prove the equivalence of the
two theories. Both deﬁnitions are modular: Algebraic latti ces arise by importing twice
from the theory of semi-lattices; order-based lattices ari se by importing the inﬁmum
operation twice, once for the ordering and once for its dual. Consequently, the views
can be given modularly as well, which is particularly import ant because views must
map axioms to expensive-to-ﬁnd proofs. These additional declarations take 310 lines of
Twelf in modular and 3500 lines in ﬂattened form.
These numbers already show the value of modularity in repres entation already in
very small formalizations. If this is lacking, later steps will face severe scalability prob-
lems from blow-up in representation. Here, the named imports of MMT were the crucial
innovation to strengthen modularity.
2.2 Foundation-Independence
Mathematical knowledge is described using very different f oundations, and the most
common foundations can be grouped into set theory and type theory. Within each group
there are numerous variants, e.g., Zermelo-Fraenkel or G¨ o del-Bernays set theory, or
set theories with or without the axiom of choice. Therefore, a single representation
language can only be adequate if it is foundation-independent.
OPEN MATH and OMD OC achieve this by concentrating on structural issues and
leaving lexical ones to an external deﬁnition mechanism lik e content dictionaries or
theories. In particular, this allows us to operate without c hoosing a particular founda-
tional logical system, as we can just supply content diction aries for the symbols in the
particular logic. Thus, logics and in the same way foundations become theories, and we
speak of the logics-as-theories approach.
But conceptually, it is helpful to distinguish levels here. To state a property in the
theory CGroup like commutativity of the operation ◦ := grp/mon/mag/∗ as ∀a, b.a ◦
b = b ◦ a, we use symbols ∀ and = from ﬁrst-order logic together with ◦ from CGroup.
Even though it is structurally possible to build algebraic t heories by simply importing
ﬁrst-order logic, this would fail to describe the meta-relationship between the theories.
But this relation is crucial, e.g., when interpreting CGroup in the integers, the symbols
of the meta-language are not interpreted because a ﬁxed inte rpretation is given in the
context.
To understand this example better, we use the M/T notation for meta-languages.
M/T refers to working in the object language T , which is deﬁned within the meta-
language M. For example, most of mathematics is carried out in F OL/ZF , i.e., ﬁrst-
order logic is the meta-language, in which set theory is deﬁn ed. F OL itself might be
deﬁned in a logical framework such asLF , and within ZF , we can deﬁne the language
of natural numbers, which yields LF/F OL/ZF/N at. For algebra, we obtain, e.g.,
F OL/Magma. M MT makes this meta-relation explicit: Every theory T may point to
another theory M as its meta-theory. We can write this as M M T /(M/T ).
LF Isabelle
FOL HOL
Monoid Ring
meta meta
meta meta
m
m′
mult
Fig. 2. Meta-Theories
In Fig. 2, the algebra example is ex-
tended by adding meta-theories. The the-
ory FOL for ﬁrst-order logic is the meta-
theory for all algebraic theories, and the
theory LF for the logical framework LF is
the meta-theory of FOL and of the theory
HOL for higher-order logic.
Now the crucial advantage of the
logics-as-theories approach is that on all
three levels the same module system can
be used: For example, the viewsm and m′
indicate possible translations on the levels
of logical frameworks and logics, respectively. Similarly, logics and foundations can be
built modularly. Thus, we can use imports to represent inheritance at the level of logical
foundations and views to represent formal translations bet ween them. Just like in the
little theories approach, we can prove meta-logical result s in the simplest foundation
that is expressive enough and then use views to move results between foundations.
Example 2 (Little Logics and Little Foundations). In [ 15], we formalize the syntax,
proof theory, and model theory and prove the soundness of ﬁrs t-order logic in M MT.
Using the module system, we can treat all connectives and quantiﬁers separately. Thus,
we can reuse these fragments to deﬁne other logics, and in [ 18] we do that, e.g., for
sorted ﬁrst-order logic and modal logic.
For the deﬁnition of the model theory, we need to formalize se t theory in M MT,
which is a signiﬁcant investment, and even then doing proofsin set theory — as needed
for the soundness proof — is tedious. Therefore, in [16], we develop the set theoretical
foundation itself modularly. We deﬁne a typed higher-order logic HOL ﬁrst, which is
expressive enough for many applications such as the above so undness proof. Then a
view from HOL to ZF proves that ZF is a reﬁnement of HOL and completes the proof of
the soundness of FOL relative to models deﬁned in ZF.
Case Study 2: Ex. 2 already showed that it is feasible to represent foundations
and relations between foundations in M MT. Being able to this is a qualitative aspect
of cross-domain scalability. In another case study, we repr esented LF/Isabelle and
LF/Isabelle/HOL ([26,23]) as well as a translation from them into LF/F OL/ZF C
(see [18]).
To our knowledge, M MT is the only declarative formalism in which comparable
foundation or logic translations have been conducted. In He ts ([21]) a number of logic
translations are implemented in Haskell. Twelf and Delphin provide logic and func-
tional programming languages, respectively, on top of LF ([ 27,28]), which have been
used to formalize the HOL-Nuprl translation ([22]).
2.3 Symbol Identiﬁers “in the Large”
In mathematical languages, we need to be able to refer to (i.e., identify) content objects
in order to state the semantic relations. It was a somewhat su rprising realization in the
design of M MT that to understand the symbol identiﬁers is almost as difﬁcu lt as to
understand the whole module system. Theories are containers for symbol declarations,
and relations between theories deﬁne the available symbols in any given theory. Since
every available symbol should have a canonical identiﬁer, t he syntax of identiﬁers is
inherently connected to the possible relations between theories.
In principle, there are two ways to identify content object: by location (relative to
a particular document or ﬁle) and by context (relative to a mathematical theory). The
ﬁrst one essentially makes use of the organizational struct ure of ﬁles and ﬁle systems,
and the second makes use of mathematical structuring principles supplied by the repre-
sentation format.
As a general rule, it is preferable to use identiﬁcation by co ntext as the distribution
of knowledge over ﬁle systems is usually a secondary consideration. Then the mapping
between theory identiﬁers and physical theory locations can be deferred to an extralin-
guistic catalog. Resource identiﬁcation by context should still be compatible with the
URI-based approach that mediates most resource transport o ver the internet. This is
common practice in scalable programming languages such as Java where package iden-
tiﬁers are URIs and classes are located using the classpath.
For logical and mathematical knowledge, the O PEN MATH 2 standard ([6]) and the
current OMD OC version 1.2 deﬁne URIs for symbols. A symbol is identiﬁed by t he
symbol name and content dictionary, which in turn is identiﬁ ed by the CD name and
the CD base, i.e., the URI where the CD is located. From these c onstituents, symbol
URIs are formed using URI fragments (the part after the # delimiter). However, OPEN -
MATH imposes a one-CD-one-ﬁle restriction, which is too restrictive in general. While
OMD OC1.2 permits multiple theories per ﬁle, it requires ﬁle-uniq ue identiﬁers for all
symbols. In both cases, the use of URI fragments, which are resolved only on the client,
forces clients to retrieve the complete ﬁle even if only a single symbol is needed.
Furthermore, many module systems have features that impedeor complicate the for-
mation of canonical symbol URIs. Such features include unna med imports, unnamed
axioms, overloading, opening of modules, or shadowing of sy mbol names. Typically,
this leads to a non-trivial correspondence between user-visible and application-internal
identiﬁers. But this impedes or complicates cross-applica tion scalability where all ap-
plications (ranging from, e.g., a Javascript GUI to a database backend) must understand
the same identiﬁers.
MMT avoids the above pitfalls and introduces a simple yet expressive web-scalable
syntax for symbol identiﬁers. An MMT-URI is of the form doc?mod?sym where
– doc is a URI without query or fragment, e.g.,http://cds.omdoc.org/math/algebra/algegra1.omdoc
which identiﬁes (but not necessarily locates) an MMT document,
– mod is a /-separated sequence of local names that gives the path to a nested theory
in the above document, e.g., Ring,
– sym is a /-separated sequence imp1/ . . . /impn/con of local names such that
impi is an import and con a symbol name, e.g., mult/mon/∗,
– a local name is of the form pchar+ where pchar is deﬁned as in RFC 3986 [ 2],
which — possibly via %-encoding — permits almost all Unicode characters.
In our running example, the canonical URI of multiplicationin a ring ishttp://cds.omdoc.org/math/algebra/algegra1.omdoc?Ring?mult/mon/*.
Note that the use of two ? characters in a URI is unusual outside of M MT, but le-
gal w.r.t. RFC 3986. Of course, M MT also deﬁnes relative URIs that are resolved
against the URI of the containing declaration. The most impo rtant case is when doc
is empty. Then the resolution proceeds as in RFC 3986, e.g., ?mod′?sym′ resolves to
doc?mod′?sym′ relative to doc?mod?sym (Note that this differs from RFC 2396.).
MMT deﬁnes some additional cases that are needed in mathematica l practice and go
beyond the expressivity of relative URIs: Relative to doc?mod?sym, the resolution of
??sym′ and ?/mod′?sym′ yields doc?mod?sym′ and doc?mod/mod′?sym′, respec-
tively.
Case Study 3: URIs are the main data structure needed for cross-applicati on scala-
bility, and our experience shows that they must be implemented by almost every periph-
eral system, even those that do not implement MMT itself. Already at this point, we had
to implement them in SML ([31]), Javascript ([13]), XQuery ([35]), Haskell (for Hets,
[21]), and Bean Shell (for a jEdit plugin) — in addition to the Sca la-based reference
API (Sect. 3).
This was only possible because M MT-URIs constitute a well-balanced trade-off
between mathematical rigor, feasibility, and URI-compatibility: In particular, due to the
use of the two separators / and ? (rather than only one), they can be parsed locally, i.e.,
without access to or understanding of the surrounding M MT document. And they can
be dereferenced using standard URI libraries and URI-URL tr anslations. At the same
time, they provide canonical names for all symbols that are i n scope, including those
that are only available through imports.
3 A Scalable Implementation
As the implementation language for the MMT reference API, we pick Scala, a program-
ming language designed to be scalable ([
24]). Being functional, Scala permits elegant
code, and based on and fully compatible with Java, it offers cross-application and web-
level scalability.
The M MT API implements the syntax and semantics of M MT. It compiles to a
1 MB Java archive ﬁle that can be readily integrated into appl ications. Library and
documentation can be obtained from [30]. Two technical aspects are especially notable
from the point of view of scalability. Firstly, all M MT functionality is exposed to non-
Java applications via a scriptable shell and via an HTTP serv let. Secondly, the API
maintains an abstraction layer that separates the backends that physically store M MT
documents (URLs) from the document identiﬁers (URIs). Thus, it is conﬁgurable which
MMT documents are located, e.g., in a remote database or on the lo cal ﬁle system. In
the following section we describe some of the advanced features.
3.1 Validation
Validation describes the process of checking M MT theory graphs against the M MT
grammar and type system. MMT validation is done in three increasingly strict stages.
The ﬁrst stage is XML validation against a context-free RelaxNG grammar. As this
only catches errors in the surface syntax, M MT documents are validated structurally
in a second stage. Structural validity guarantees that all declarations have unique URIs
and that all references to symbols, theories, etc. can be res olved. This is still too lax
for mathematics as it lacks type-checking. But it is exactly the right middle ground
between the weak validation against a context-free grammar and the expensive and
complex validation against a speciﬁc type system: On the one hand, it is efﬁcient and
foundation-independent, and on the other hand, it providesan invariant that is sufﬁcient
for many MKM services such as storage, navigation, or search.
Type-checking is foundation-speciﬁc, therefore each foun dation must provide an
MMT plugin that implements the typing and equality judgments. M ore precisely, the
plugin must provide function that (semi-)decide for two giv en terms A and B over a
theory T , the judgments ⊢ T A = B and ⊢ T A : B. Given such a plugin, a third valida-
tion stage can reﬁne structural validity by additionally va lidating well-typedness of all
declarations. For scalability, it is important that (i) these plugins are stateless as the the-
ory graph is maintained by MMT, and that the (ii) modular structure is transparent to the
plugin. Thus plugin developers only need to provide the corealgorithms for the speciﬁc
type system, and all MKM issues can be relegated to dedicated implementations.
Context-free validation is well-understood. Moreover, M MT is designed such that
foundation-speciﬁc validation is obtained from structura l validation by using the same
inference system with some typing and equality constraintsadded. This leaves structural
validation as the central issue for scalability.
Case Study 4: We have implemented structural validation by decomposing an MMT
theory graph into a list of atomic declarations. For example , the declaration T = {s1 :
τ1, s 2 : τ2} of a theory T with two typed symbols yields the atomic declarations
T = {}, T ?s1 : τ, and T ?s2 : τ2. This “unnesting” of declarations is a special property
of the MMT type system that is not usually found in other systems. It is possible because
every declaration has a canonical URI and can therefore be taken out of its context.
This is important for scalability as it permits incremental processing. In particu-
lar, large MMT documents can be processed as streams of atomic declarations. Further-
more, the semantics of MMT guarantees that the processing order of these streams never
matters if the (easily-inferrable) dependencies between declarations are respected. This
would even permit parallel processing, another prerequisite for scalability.
3.2 Querying
Once a theory graph has been read, M MT provides two ways how to access it: M MT-
URI dereferencing and querying with respect to a simple ontology.
Firstly, a theory graph always has two forms: the modular form where all nodes are
partial theories whose declarations are computed using imports, and the ﬂattened form
where all imports are replaced with translated copies of theimported declarations. Many
implementations of module systems, e.g., Isabelle’s locales, automatically compute the
ﬂat form and do not maintain the modular form. This can be a thr eat to scalability as it
can induce combinatorial explosion.
MMT maintains only the modular form. However, as every declarat ion present in
the ﬂat form has a canonical URI, the access to the ﬂat form is p ossible via M MT-URI
dereferencing: Dereferencing computes (and caches) the in duced declarations present
in the ﬂat form. Thus, applications can ignore the modular structure and interact with a
modular theory graph as if it were ﬂattened, but the exponent ially expensive ﬂattening
is performed transparently and incrementally.
Secondly, the API computes the ABox of a theory graph with res pect to the M MT
ontology. It has M MT-URIs as individuals and 10 types like theory or symbol as
unary predicates. 11 binary predicates represent relation s between individuals such as
HasDomain relating an import to a theory or HasOccurrenceOfInType relating
two symbols. These relations are structurally complete: The structure of a theory graph
can be recovered from the ABox. The computation time is negligible as it is a byproduct
of validation anyway.
The API includes a simple query language for this ontology. I t can compute all
individuals in the theory graph that are in a certain relatio n to a given individual. The
possible queries include composition, union, transitive closure, and inverse of relations.
The ABox can also be regarded as the result of compiling an M MT theory graph.
Many operations on theory graphs only require the ABox: for e xample the computa-
tion of the forward or backward dependency cone of a declaration which are needed to
generate self-contained documents and in change management, respectively. This is im-
portant for cross-application scalability because applic ations can parse the ABox very
easily. Moreover, we obtain a notion of separate compilation: ABox-generation only
requires structural validity, and the latter can be implemented if only the ABoxes of the
referenced ﬁles are known.
Case Study 5: Since all M MT knowledge items have a globally unique M MT-URI,
being able to dereference them is sufﬁcient to obtain comple te information about a
theory graph. We have implemented a web servlet for M MT that can act as a local
proxy for MMT-URIs and as a URI catalog that maps MMT-URIs into (local or remote)
URLs. The former means that all MMT-URIs are resolved locally if possible. The latter
means that the M MT-URI of a module can be independent from its physical locatio n.
The same servlet can be run remotely, e.g., on the same machin e as a mathematical
database and conﬁgured to retrieve ﬁles directly from there or from other servers.
Thus systems can access all their input documents by URI via alocal service, which
makes all storage issues transparent. (Using presentation , see below, these can even
be presented in the system’s native syntax.) This solves a ce ntral problem in current
implementations of formal systems: the restriction to in-m emory knowledge. Besides
the advantages of distributed storage and caching, a simple example application is that
imported theories are automatically included when remote d ocuments are retrieved in
order to avoid successive lookups.
3.3 Presentation
MMT comes with a declarative language for notations similar to [
19] that can be used
to transform M MT theory graphs into arbitrary output formats. Notations are declared
by giving parameters such as ﬁxity and input/output precede nce, and snippets for sep-
arators and brackets. Notations are not only used for mathem atical objects but also for
all MMT expressions, e.g. theory declarations and theory graphs.
Two aspects are particularly important for scalability. Firstly, sets of notations (called
styles) behave like theories, which are sets of symbols. In particular, styles and notations
have MMT-URIs (and are part of the MMT ontology), and the MMT module system can
be used for inheritance between styles.
Secondly, every M MT expression has a URI E, for declarations this is trivial, for
most mathematical objects it is the URI of the head symbol. Co rrespondingly, every
notation must give an M MT-URI N, and the notation is applicable to an expression if
N is a preﬁx of E. More speciﬁc notations can inherit from more general ones,e.g., the
brackets and separators are usually given only once in the mo st general notation. This
simpliﬁes the authoring and maintenance of styles for large theory graphs signiﬁcantly.
Case Study 6: In order to present M MT content as, e.g., HTML with embedded
presentation M ATHML, we need a style with only the 20 generic notations given in
http://alpha.tntbase.mathweb.org/repos/cds/omdoc/mathml.omdoc.
<notation for="http://cds.omdoc.org/"
role="constant">
<element name="mo">
<attribute name="xref">
<text value="#"/><id/>
</attribute>
<hole><component index="2"/></hole>
</element>
</notation>
For example, the notation declara-
tion on the right applies to all con-
stants whose cdbase starts with
http://cds.omdoc.org/
and renders OMS elements as mo elements.
The latter has an xref attribute that links
to the parallel markup (which is included by
notations at higher levels). The content of the
mo elements is a “hole” that is by default ﬁlled with the second c omponent, for con-
stants that is the name (0 and 1 are cdbase and cd.).
This scales well because we can give notations for speciﬁc theories, e.g., by saying
that ?M agma?∗ is associative inﬁx and optionally giving a different opera tor symbol
than ∗. We can also add other output formats easily: Our implementa tion (see [
18])
extends the above notation with ajobad:href attribute containing the MMT-URI —
this URI is picked up by our JOBAD Javascript ([13]) for hyperlinking.
4 A Scalable Database
The TNTBase system [
34] is a versioned XML-database with a client-server architec -
ture. It integrates Berkeley DB XML into a Subversion server. DB XML stores HEAD
revisions of XML ﬁles; non-XML content like PDF, images or LATEX source ﬁles, dif-
ferences between revisions, directory entry lists and othe r repository information are
retained in a usual SVN back-end storage (Berkeley DB in our c ase). Keeping XML
documents in DB XML allows accessing ﬁles not only via any SVN client but also
through the DB XML API that supports efﬁcient querying of XMLcontent via XQuery
and (versioned) modiﬁcation of that content via XQuery Update.
In addition, TNTBase provides a plugin architecture for doc ument format-speciﬁc
customizations [35]. Using OMD OC as concrete syntax for MMT and the MMT API as
a TNTBase plugin, we have made TNTBase M MT-aware so that data-intensive M MT
algorithms can be executed within the database.
The TNTBase system and its documentation are available athttp://tntbase.org.
Below we describe some of the features particularly relevant for scalability.
4.1 Generating Content
Large scale collaborative authoring of mathematical docum ents requires distributed
and versioned storage. On the language end, M MT supports this by making all iden-
tiﬁers URIs so that M MT documents can be distributed among authors and networks
and reference each other. On the database end, TNTBase suppo rts this by acting as a
versioned MMT database.
In principle, versioning and distribution could also be rea lized with a plain SVN
server. But for mathematics, it is important that the storag e backend is aware of at
least some aspects of the mathematical semantics. In large s cale authoring processes,
an important requirement is to guarantee consistency, i.e., it should be possible to reject
commits of invalid documents. Therefore, TNTBase supportsdocument format-speciﬁc
validation.
For scalability, it is crucial that validation of interlinked collections of M MT docu-
ments is incremental, i.e., only those documents added or changed during a commitare
validated. This is a signiﬁcant effect because the committe d documents almost always
import modules from other documents that are already in the database, and these should
not be revalidated — especially not if they contain unnecessary modules that introduce
further dependencies.
Therefore, we integrate M MT separate compilation into TNTBase. During a com-
mit TNTBase validates all committed ﬁles structurally by ca lling the M MT API. After
successful validation, the ABox is generated and immediately stored in TNTBase. Ref-
erences to previously committed ﬁles are not resolved; instead their generated ABox is
used for validation. Thus, validation is limited to the committed documents.
Case Study 7: In the L ATIN project [ 18], we create an atlas of logics and logic
translations formalized in M MT. At the current early stage of the project 5 people are
actively editing so far about 100 ﬁles. These contain about 2 00 theories and 50 views,
which form a single highly inter-linked M MT theory graph. We use TNTBase as the
validity-guaranteeing backend storage.
The L ATIN theory graph is highly modular. For example, the document gi ving the
set-theoretical model theory of ﬁrst-order logic from [ 16] depends on about 100 other
theories. (We counted them conveniently using an XQuery, see below.) Standalone vali-
dation of this document takes about 15 seconds if needed ﬁlesare retrieved from a local
ﬁle system. Using separate compilation in TNTBase, it is almost instantaneous.
In fact, we can conﬁgure TNTBase so that structural validati on is preceded by Re-
laxNG validation. This permits the MMT application to drop inefﬁcient checks for syn-
tax errors. Similarly, structural validation could be preceded by foundation-speciﬁc val-
idation, but often we do not have a well-understood notion of separate compilation for
speciﬁc foundations. But even in that case, we can do better t han naive revalidation.
MMT is designed so that it is foundation-independent which modules a given document
depends on. Thus, we can collect these modules in one documen t using an efﬁcient
XQuery (see below) and then revalidate only this document. M oreover, we can use
the presentation algorithm from Sect. 3.3 to transform the generated document into the
input syntax of a dedicated implementation.
4.2 Retrieving Content
While the previous section already showed some of the streng th of an M MT-aware
TNTBase, its true strength lies in retrieving content. As ev ery XML-native database,
TNTBase supports XQuery but extends the DB XML syntax by a notion of ﬁle system
path to address path-based collections of documents. Furth ermore, it supports index-
ing to improve performance of queries and the querying of pre vious revisions. Finally,
custom XQuery modules can be integrated into TNTBase.
MMT-aware retrieval is achieved through two measures. Firstly , ABox caching
means that for every committed ﬁle, the M MT ABox is generated and stored in TNT-
Base. The ABox contains only two kinds of declarations — inst ances of unary and
binary predicates — and is stored as a simple XML document. Th e element types in
these documents are indexed, which yields efﬁcient global queries.
Example 3. An M MT document for the algebra example from Sect. 2.1 is served at
http://alpha.tntbase.mathweb.org/repos/cds/math/algebra/algebra1.omdoc. Its ABox is cached
at http://alpha.tntbase.mathweb.org:8080/tntbase/cds/restful/integration/validation/mmt/content/
math/algebra/algebra1.omdoc.
Secondly, custom XQuery functions utilize the cached and indexed ABoxes to
provide efﬁcient access to frequently needed aggregated do cuments. These include in
particular the forward and backward dependency cones of a mo dule. The backward
dependency cone of a module M is the minimal set of modules needed to make M
well-formed. Dually, the forward cone contains all modules that need M. If it were not
for the indexed ABoxes, the latter would be highly expensive to compute: linear in the
size of the database.
Case Study 8: The M MT presentation algorithm described in Sect. 3.3 takes a set
of notations as input. However, additional notations may begiven in imported theories,
typically format-independent notations such as the one making ?Magma?∗ inﬁx. There-
fore, when an M MT expression is rendered, all imported theories must be traversed for
the sole reason of obtaining all notations.
Without MMT awareness in TNTBase, this would require multiple successive queries
which is particularly harmful when presentation is executed locally while the imported
theories are stored remotely. But even when all theories are available on a local disk,
these successive calls already take 1.5 seconds for the abov e algebra document. (Once
the notations are retrieved, the presentation itself is instantaneous.)
In MMT-aware TNTBase, we can retrieve all notations in the backward dependency
closure of the presented expression with a single XQuery. AB ox-indexing made this
instantaneous up to network lag.
TNTBase does not only permit the efﬁcient retrieval of such generated documents,
but it also permits to commit edited versions of them. We callthese virtual documents
in [35]. These are essentially “XML database views” analogous to v iews in relational
databases. They are editable, and TNTBase transparently pa tches the differences into
the original ﬁles in the underlying versioning system.
Case Study 9: While manual refactoring of large theory graphs is as difﬁcu lt as
refactoring large software, there is virtually no tool support for it. For MMT, we obtain
a simple renaming tool using a virtual document for the one-s tep (i.e., non-transitive)
forward dependency cone of a theory T (see [35] for an example). That contains all
references to T so that T can be renamed and all references modiﬁed in one go.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper aims to pave the way for MKM “in the large” by proposing a theoretical and
technological basis for a “Universal Digital Mathematics Library” (UDML) which has
been touted as the grand challenge for MKM. In a nutshell, we conclude that the prob-
lem of scalability has be to addressed on all levels: we need modularity and accessibility
of induced declarations in the representation format, incr ementality and memoization
in the implementation of the fundamental algorithms, and a m ass storage solution that
supports fragment access and indexing. We have developed pr ototypical implementa-
tions and tested them on a variety of case studies.
The next step will be to integrate the parts and assemble a UDM L installation with
these. We plan to use the next generation of the OMD OC format, which will integrate
the MMT infrastructure described in this paper as an interoperability layer; see [20] for
a discussion of the issues involved. In the last years, we have developed OMDOC trans-
lation facilities for various fully formal theorem proving systems and their libraries.
In the LATIN project [ 18], we are already developing a graph of concrete “logics-as-
theories” to make the underlying logics interoperable.
References
1. S. Autexier, D. Hutter, H. Mantel, and A. Schairer. Toward s an Evolutionary Formal
Software-Development Using CASL. In D. Bert, C. Choppy, and P. Mosses, editors,WADT,
volume 1827 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 73–88. Springer, 1999.
2. T. Berners-Lee, R. Fielding, and L. Masinter. Uniform Res ource Identiﬁer (URI): Generic
Syntax. RFC 3986, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2005.
3. Y . Bertot and P. Cast´ eran.Coq’Art: The Calculus of Inductive Constructions. Springer, 2004.
4. N. Bourbaki. Theory of Sets. Elements of Mathematics. Springer, 1968.
5. N. Bourbaki. Algebra I. Elements of Mathematics. Springer, 1974.
6. S. Buswell, O. Caprotti, D. Carlisle, M. Dewar, M. Gaetano , and M. Kohlhase. The
Open Math Standard, Version 2.0. Technical report, The Open Math Society, 2004. See
http://www.openmath.org/standard/om20.
7. CoFI (The Common Framework Initiative). CASL Reference Manual, volume 2960 ofLNCS.
Springer, 2004.
8. H. Curry and R. Feys. Combinatory Logic. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1958.
9. S. Dumbrava, F. Horozal, and K. Sojakova. A Case Study on Fo rmalizing Algebra in a
Module System. In F. Rabe and C. Sch¨ urmann, editors,Workshop on Modules and Libraries
for Proof Assistants, volume 429 ofACM International Conference Proceeding Series, pages
11–18, 2009.
10. W. Farmer. An Infrastructure for Intertheory Reasoning. In D. McAllester, editor,Conference
on Automated Deduction, pages 115–131. Springer, 2000.
11. W. Farmer, J. Guttman, and F. Thayer. Little Theories. In D. Kapur, editor, Conference on
Automated Deduction, pages 467–581, 1992.
12. William M. Farmer. Mathematical Knowledge Management. In David G. Schwartz, editor,
Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management, pages 599–604. Idea Group Reference, 2005.
13. J. Giceva, C. Lange, and F. Rabe. Integrating Web Service s into Active Mathematical Doc-
uments. In J. Carette and L. Dixon and C. Sacerdoti Coen and S. Watt, editor, Intelligent
Computer Mathematics, volume 5625 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 279–
293. Springer, 2009.
14. J. Goguen, Timothy Winkler, J. Meseguer, K. Futatsugi, and J. Jouannaud. Introducing OBJ.
In J. Goguen, D. Coleman, and R. Gallimore, editors,Applications of Algebraic Speciﬁcation
using OBJ. Cambridge, 1993.
15. F. Horozal and F. Rabe. Representing Model Theory in a Typ e-Theoretical Logical Frame-
work. In Fourth Workshop on Logical and Semantic Frameworks, with Applications, volume
256 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, pages 49–65, 2009.
16. F. Horozal and F. Rabe. Representing Model Theory in
a Type-Theoretical Logical Framework. Under review, see
http://kwarc.info/frabe/Research/EArabe_folsound_10.pdf, 2010.
17. W. Howard. The formulas-as-types notion of construction. In To H.B. Curry: Essays on Com-
binatory Logic, Lambda-Calculus and Formalism, pages 479–490. Academic Press, 1980.
18. M. Kohlhase, T. Mossakowski, and F. Rabe. The LATIN Proje ct, 2009. See
https://trac.omdoc.org/LATIN/.
19. M. Kohlhase, C. M¨ uller, and F. Rabe. Notations for Living Mathematical Documents. In S.
Autexier and J. Campbell and J. Rubio and V . Sorge and M. Suzuki and F. Wiedijk, editor,
Mathematical Knowledge Management, volume 5144 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 504–519, 2008.
20. M. Kohlhase, F. Rabe, and C. Sacerdoti Coen. A Foundational View on Integration Problems.
Submitted to CALCULEMUS, 2010.
21. T. Mossakowski, C. Maeder, and K. L¨ uttich. The Heterogeneous Tool Set. In O. Grumberg
and M. Huth, editor,TACAS 2007, volume 4424 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
519–522, 2007.
22. P. Naumov, M. Stehr, and J. Meseguer. The HOL/NuPRL proof translator - a practical ap-
proach to formal interoperability. In 14th International Conference on Theorem Proving in
Higher Order Logics. Springer, 2001.
23. T. Nipkow, L. Paulson, and M. Wenzel. Isabelle/HOL — A Proof Assistant for Higher-Order
Logic. Springer, 2002.
24. M. Odersky, L. Spoon, and B. Venners. Programming in Scala. artima, 2007.
25. S. Owre, J. Rushby, and N. Shankar. PVS: A Prototype Veriﬁ cation System. In D. Kapur,
editor, 11th International Conference on Automated Deduction (CAD E), pages 748–752.
Springer, 1992.
26. L. Paulson. Isabelle: A Generic Theorem Prover, volume 828 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer, 1994.
27. F. Pfenning and C. Sch¨ urmann. System description: Twel f - a meta-logical framework for
deductive systems. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 1632:202–206, 1999.
28. A. Poswolsky and C. Sch¨ urmann. System Description: Delphin A Functional Programming
Language for Deductive Systems. In A. Abel and C. Urban, editors, International Workshop
on Logical Frameworks and Metalanguages: Theory and Practice, pages 135–141. ENTCS,
2008.
29. F. Rabe. Representing Logics and Logic Translations. PhD thesis, Jacobs University Bremen,
2008. Available at http://kwarc.info/frabe/Research/phdthesis.pdf.
30. F. Rabe. The MMT System, 2008. See https://trac.kwarc.info/MMT/.
31. F. Rabe and C. Sch¨ urmann. A Practical Module System for LF. In J. Cheney and A. Felty,
editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on Logical Frameworks: Meta-Th eory and Practice
(LFMTP), pages 40–48. ACM Press, 2009.
32. D. Sannella and M. Wirsing. A Kernel Language for Algebra ic Speciﬁcation and Imple-
mentation. In M. Karpinski, editor, Fundamentals of Computation Theory, pages 413–427.
Springer, 1983.
33. A. Trybulec and H. Blair. Computer Assisted Reasoning wi th MIZAR. In A. Joshi, editor,
Proceedings of the 9th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 26–28,
1985.
34. V . Zholudev and M. Kohlhase. TNTBase: a Versioned Storage for XML. In Proceedings of
Balisage: The Markup Conference 2009, volume 3. Mulberry Technologies, Inc., 2009.
35. V . Zholudev, M. Kohlhase, and F. Rabe. A [insert XML Forma t] Database for [insert cool
application]. In Proceedings of XMLPrague. XMPPrague.cz, 2010.