arXiv:1109.0633v1  [cs.LO]  3 Sep 2011
Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)
Eliciting implicit assumptions of proofs in the Mizar
Mathematical Library by property omission
Jesse Alama 1
the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later
Abstract When formalizing proofs with interactive theorem provers, it often
happens that extra background knowledge (declarative or proce dural) about
mathematical concepts is employed without the formalizer explicitly in voking
it, to help the formalizer focus on the relevant details of the proof. In the
contexts of producing and studying a formalized mathematical arg ument, such
mechanisms are clearly valuable. But we may not always wish to suppre ss
background knowledge. For certain purposes, it is important to kn ow, as far
as possible, precisely what background knowledge was implicitly employ ed
in a formal proof. In this note we describe an experiment conducte d on the
Mizar Mathematical Library of formal mathematical proofs to elicit one s uch
class of implicitly employed background knowledge: properties of fun ctions
and relations (e.g., commutativity, asymmetry, etc.).
1 Introduction
When formalizing mathematical proofs with interactive theorem pro vers, it
often happens that extra background knowledge is employed witho ut the for-
malizer explicitly invoking it. The eﬀect is clear: thanks to such facilities , the
formalizer can focus more on the relevant details of the proof he is w orking
on, rather than (relatively more) tedious “details”. In the contex ts of produc-
ing and studying a formalized mathematical argument, such mechan isms are
important and deserve to be strengthened.
But we may not always wish to suppress background knowledge. For certain
purposes, it is important to know, as far as possible, precisely what background
The author was supported by the FCT project “Dialogical Foun dations of Semantics” (Di-
FoS) in the ESF EuroCoRes programme LogICCC (FCT LogICCC/00 01/2007).
Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
New University of Lisbon
E-mail: j.alama@fct.unl.pt
2
knowledge was implicitly employed in a formal proof. There are a numbe r of
practical applications of such information, such as facilitating theo ry explo-
ration [ ?] , library recompilation [ ?], improved machine learning about formal
proofs, premise selection heuristics, etc. The aim of eliciting exactly what is
used is also important philosophically, because we come closer to ﬁndin g what
is truly necessary for the success of a theorem. Our project thu s aligns in a
modest way with the overall aims of reverse mathematics [ ?], a vibrant branch
of contemporary proof theory whose aim is to discover axioms from theorems
(rather than the other way around).
The task of eliciting all implicit information of a formalized mathematical
proof is a stimulating challenge. Various approaches can be used dep ending on
the ITP and its associated logic(s). (For a comparison of how this ca n be done
for Mizar as compared to Coq, see [ ?].) In this note we describe an experiment
conducted on the Mizar Mathematical Library ( MML) of formal mathematical
proofs to elicit one such class of implicitly employed background knowle dge:
properties of functions and relations (e.g., commutativity, asymme try, etc.).
We employ the term constructor to mean function or relation in a formal
mathematical library. 1 The MML is a large collection of formal mathematical
proofs expressed in classical ﬁrst-order set theory and a natur al deduction-style
declarative proof formalism. (For an introduction to Mizar, see [ ?].) Analogous
experiments could clearly be performed on other libraries of formaliz ed math-
ematical knowledge. The Mizar system is especially attractive for this kind of
experiment because of the clear semantics of the properties that can be implic-
itly attached to functions and relations (they are simple universal ﬁ rst-order
formulas) and the relative ease of manipulating these properties.
Section 2 outlines some previous related work and sketches some of the
intended applications of the constructor property dependency d ata. Section 3
gives two examples of how constructor properties can be implicitly us ed in
formal proofs in Mizar. Section 4 describes the method we used to make explicit
the constructor properties that are needed for Mizar inferences. The heart of
the paper is Section 5, where we give the results of our computation about
needed and unneeded constructor properties for the entire Mizar Mathematical
Library.
2 Applications and previous work
Mizar’s notion of constructor properties (and another mechanism for s uppress-
ing the premises of an inference, so-called requirements) are a rela tively new
invention for Mizar [?]. The information that a constructor property is needed
for an inference can be exploited in various ways. One potential app lication
is to use the needed-property information as an indication of what f ormula
shapes are useful in the search for a successful proof. Building o n the ideas of
1 The term “constructor” is in fact part of the Mizar idiolect for formal mathematics.
There are more kinds of objects that count as “constructors” in Mizar—such as structures—
but in this paper we are interested only in functions and pred icates.
3
S. Shulz [ ?], one would strip away the actual symbols employed in a proof that
implicitly relies on some constructor property, thereby learning som e structural
information about what contributes to the success of a theorem. One could
proﬁtably using this information to assist in the problem of selecting c andi-
date premises in large ATP problems [ ?]. More generally, such a structural
approach can give us some information about shapes of successfu l patterns of
formal reasoning.
The information that a property of a constructor is not needed ind icates,
prima facie, that one is dealing with a kind of generalization. It may not
always be clear, though, how to use this information to craft gener alizations.
The problem problem lies in the familiar distinction in logic between reason ing
formally about a class of structures or about a single structure. I t would seem
that information that a property is not needed information is more u seful in
cases of reasoning about classes of structure (e.g., about ﬁelds) , but in the
case of reasoning about “concrete” mathematical objects (a sin gle structure,
e.g., the real numbers). Thus, we may ﬁnd in a theorem about real n umbers
that commutativity of addition is not used. One could immediately cons truct
a generalization of such a theorem to a class of structures that ar e just like
the real numbers, but in which the commutativity of addition is not as sumed.
The value of such a generalization may not be clear. By contrast, ima gine we
encounter a theorem about ﬁelds in which the commutativity of the ﬁ eld’s
addition operation is not used. In this case, the generalization proc edure is
similar to the procedure used in the case of the reals. By contrast, though, the
signiﬁcance and utility of such a generalization is clearer because the reasoning
was already about a wide class of structures, the properties of wh ose functions
and relations enjoyed some ﬂexibility.
One might imagine an advisor attached to an interactive theorem pro ver
that can use the information that a constructor property is need ed to help one
investigate and formulate suitable generalizations. As discussed ea rlier, one
relevant task (which seems quite interesting from the perspective of artiﬁcial
intelligence) would be to decide whether a generalization is even warra nted.
It’s intuitively clear that when we use a mathematical concept in a pro of we
use only some aspects of it and not others; at some steps, we requ ire one thing
of a concept, but at other steps we require something else. Dividing a concept
so that we never require from it nothing less than its “full content” every time
it is used seems like a drastic suggestion. Still, we may ﬁnd value in a mitiga ted
form of this advice.
3 Omitting properties of functions and relations
In Mizar, one can attach properties to functions and relations; Tables 1 and 2
lays out all nine properties currently supported by Mizar. These properties are
used by the Mizar veriﬁer as “background knowledge” that doesn’t need to be
cited by a formalizer.
4
Relation Property Formula
reﬂexivity ∀x[R(x, x)]
symmetry ∀x∀y[R(x, y) → R(y, x)]
asymmetry ∀x∀y[R(x, y) → ¬ R(y, x)]
connectedness ∀x∀y[R(x, y) ∨ R(y, x)]
irreﬂexivity ∀x[¬ R(x, x)]
T able 1 Properties of relations in Mizar
Function Property Formula
projectivity ∀x[f (f (x)) = f (x)]
involutiveness ∀x[f (f (x)) = x]
idempotence ∀x[g(x, x) = x]
commutativity ∀x∀y[g(x, y) = g(y, x)]
T able 2 Properties of functions in Mizar
3.1 Example 1: Relation property
Consider the deﬁnition of the proper subset relation:
1 d e f i n i t i o n
2 let X , Y be set ;
3 pred
4 X c < Y
5 means
6 X c = Y & X <> Y ;
7 i r r e f l e x i v i t y ;
8 a s y m m e t r y;
This example, taken from the Mizar article XBOOLE 0, deﬁnes the predicate
(pred) of one set X being a proper subset c< of another Y. The symbols c=
and <> denote the subset relation and disequality, respectively. The keyw ords
irreflexivity and asymmetry included in the deﬁnition indicate that the
proper subset relation will henceforth have the properties of irre ﬂexivity and
asymmetry; inferences involving the proper subset relation will implic itly use
these properties.
There are 58 occurrences in the Mizar Mathematical Library in which the
irreﬂexivity of the proper subset relation is implicitly used. Here is one exam-
ple, taken from the article TREES 1:
1 t h e o r e m
2 not <* n * > i s _ a _ p r o p e r _ p r e f i x _ o f <* m * >
3 proof
4 assume A1 : not thesis ;
5 then <* n * > i s _ a _ p r e f i x _ o f <* m * > by X B O O L E _ 0: def 8;
6 hence c o n t r a d i c t i o n by A1 , Th16 ;
5
7 end ;
The theorem says that the one-term sequence whose sole term is t he number n
is not a proper preﬁx of the one-term sequence whose sole term is t he number
m. The binary relation is a prefix of on ﬁnite sequences is deﬁned simply
as set inclusion. The reference Th16 refers to the theorem that says that a one-
term ﬁnite sequence ⟨s⟩ is a preﬁx of the one-term ﬁnite sequence ⟨t⟩ iﬀ s = t.
The proof of our theorem goes by contradiction. Note that the sy mbol for the
proper subset relation, c<, occurs neither in the theorem nor in the proof. In
the absence of the assumption that c< is irreﬂexive, the contradiction at the
end of the proof does not follow. A contradiction indeed does not fo llow: we
get from Th16 that n = m, but this is compatible with the one-term sequence
<*n*> being a proper subset of <*m*>, if we haven’t assumed that the proper
subset relation is irreﬂexive.
3.2 Example 2: Function property
Additive magmas come equipped, of course, with an addition operatio n +. In
the case of abelian additive magmas, we know that + is commutative:
1 d e f i n i t i o n
2 let V be A b e l i a n addMagma ,
3 v be E l e m e n t of V ,
4 w be E l e m e n t of V ;
5 r e d e f i n e func v + w ;
6 c o m m u t a t i v i t y ;
7 end ;
This example is taken from the Mizar article RLVECT 1. The keyword redefine
here does not indicate that we are changing the deﬁniens of the bina ry function
+ on elements of additive magmas (which in any event is essentially unde ﬁned);
rather, we are attaching the property of commutativity to +. Suc h an opera-
tion is obviously admissible because of the deﬁnition of what it means fo r an
additive magma to be abelian.
As an example of an inference that implicitly depends on the commutat ivity
of +, consider:
1 t h e o r e m
2 for L being add - a s s o c i a t i v e r i g h t _ z e r o e d
3 r i g h t _ c o m p l e m e n t a b l e A b e l i a n
4 non empty addLoopStr ,
5 b , c being E l e m e n t of L
6 holds c = b - ( b - c )
7 proof
8 let L be add - a s s o c i a t i v e r i g h t _ z e r o e d
9 r i g h t _ c o m p l e m e n t a b l e A b e l i a n
6
10 non empty addLoopStr ,
11 b , c be E l e m e n t of L ;
12 set a = b - c ;
13 a +c - a = c - a + a by R L V E C T _ 1 :28
14 .= c by Th1 ;
15 hence thesis by Th1 ;
16 end ;
Ignoring the deﬁnition of all the attributes that are being attache d to the type
addLoopStr (viz., an additive Moufang loop structure), the crucial step here
is the equation on line 17. Note that the terms a and c are being swapped
without reference to the commutativity of + (the reference to the theorem
RLVECT 1:28 is not relevant here).
4 Eliciting needed implicit constructor properties
To elicit the constructor properties that are needed for an item of the Mizar
Mathematical Library, we exploit Mizar’s separation of (i) the construction of
the environment in which veriﬁcation will be carried out from (ii) the pr ocess
of veriﬁcation properly speaking.
In step (i), Mizar constructs an environment for veriﬁcation, importing all
constructors that occur explicitly or implicitly in a Mizar text. If a constructor
has a property associated with it, the environment will contain the p roperty
attached to the constructor, regardless of whether it is truly ne eded. The
environment is thus a conservative overestimate of what is truly ne eded for
the veriﬁcation to succeed. By intervening between the construc tion of the
environment and the veriﬁcation proper, one can manipulate the en vironment
in which the veriﬁcation is carried out. We simply remove a property at tached
to a constructor and carry out the veriﬁcation; if the veriﬁcation succeeds, we
know that the property of the construction was not actually need ed.
Thanks to the use of XML as the representation of the environmen t for
Mizar articles [ ?], conducting our experiment is as simple as applying certain
XSL stylesheets to the environment ﬁles.
Rather than operating on whole Mizar articles, which generally contain
dozens if not hundreds of toplevel items, we operate on a individual theorems of
the MML. This is made possible by dividing the MML into ﬁne-grained “items”
(which are in fact valid Mizar “microarticle”); see [ ?] for more information on
how this decomposition of the MML is carried out.
5 Usage of properties throughout the MML
We have so far said that a veriﬁable item I of the Mizar Mathematical Library
depends on property P of constructor C just in case I, in the absence of
the attachment of P to C, is not veriﬁable. This deﬁnition of dependence
upon a constructor property fails to capture the dependence of one item upon
7
Property Direct Items Indirect Items
reﬂexivity 54113 102426
symmetry 29744 97220
asymmetry 256 82585
connectedness 5020 83083
irreﬂexivity 91 65951
projectivity 153 10002
involutiveness 533 67853
idempotence 535 70132
commutativity 14055 92580
T able 3 Direct and indirect dependence upon properties in the MML
another. For example, suppose that an item I does not depend on property P
of constructor C, that is, I is veriﬁable if one detaches from C the property
P . Suppose, though, that item I depends on some other item I ′ which does
need property P of C. Such a though experiment suggest that we distinguish
two sense of “need”: direct and indirect.
Deﬁnition 1 Item I directly needs property P of constructor C iﬀ veriﬁ-
cation of I will fail if P is detached from C.
Item I indirectly needs property P of C iﬀ I directly needs P of C or
there exists an item I ′ such that I depends on I ′ and I ′ needs P of C.
Both senses of “need” are useful. Table 3 gives statistics about va rious
constructor properties that are needed directly and indirectly in t he MML.
There are a number of fascinating details behind these statistics:
– Reﬂexivity is directly needed by nearly half of the items of the Mizar Math-
ematical Library, and is indirectly needed by nearly the entire library . Re-
ﬂexivity of equality of sets accounts for this: it is indirectly needed b y fully
102242 items. It is perhaps not surprising that such a fundamenta l property
of a built-in logical notion pervades the library.
Putting aside equality, the next most important reﬂexive construc tor is
subset inclusion, which is indirectly needed by 93284 items. A redeﬁnit ion
of subset inclusion for ordinals is indirectly used by 8279 items. Puttin g
aside these “logical” or “set theoretical” examples, the most import ant
reﬂexive “mathematical” relation is the less-than-or-equal-to rela tion ≤ on
(extended) real numbers, whose reﬂexivity is indirectly needed by 67196
items.
– Irreﬂexivity is directly needed by only a handful of items in the library ,
but indirectly it supports about 2/3 of the library. The explanation is the
proper subset relation: the irreﬂexivity of this constructor is nee ded by
65546 items. The most important “mathematical” example is the relat ion
of one element of a relation being strictly less than another.
– Asymmetry is attached to only ﬁve constructors in the entire MML:
– ∈ (set membership);
8
– the proper subset relation;
– a variant of ∈ , deﬁned for many-sorted set structures;
– the strictly-lexicographically-less-than relation on ﬁnite tuples of n atu-
ral numbers;
– the strictly-lexicographically-less-than relation on bags of ordinals .
– The asymmetry, of ∈ , is foundationally signiﬁcant in the sense of mathe-
matical logic (it expresses a weak form of the axiom of foundation) a nd for
the Mizar Mathematical Library. The asymmetry of this constructor alone
accounts for essentially all items that need the asymmetry of any c onstruc-
tor: 82581 items indirectly need this weak form of foundation, wher eas only
283 items directly depend on this property of ∈ .2
– Likewise, projectivity is rarely directly needed, but supports a sub stantial
piece of the library. Interestingly, it is the closure operation deﬁne d on
subsets of a topological space 3 that accounts for the lion’s share of the
items that indirectly need an projective constructor: 7536 items d epend on
the projectivity of the closure operation.
– Connectedness is attached to very few constructors of the Mizar Mathemat-
ical Library, but the constructors to which this property is attac hed have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence across the MML. The constructor whose connectedness
is used indirectly by the greatest number of items is the subset relat ion,
restricted to ordinals. The connectedness of this constructor e xpresses a
rather signiﬁcant fact about ordinals (any two ordinals are compar able).
The proof of this fact in Mizar uses a trichotomy-like principle for ordinals,
saying that for any two ordinals A and B, either A ∈ B, A = B, or B ∈ A.
The connectedness of the subset relation on ordinals is indirectly ne eded by
82490 items. The next most signiﬁcant example is ≤ on rational numbers,
indirectly needed by 71313 items.
– Involutiveness also requires some explanation. There are two items that vie
for the most important here:
– The sign-changing operation x ↦→ − x on real numbers is needed by
65501 items.
– The reciprocal operation z ↦→ 1/z on complex numbers is needed by
65105 items.
The constructor with the next highest number of items that indirec tly
depend on its involutiveness is the relative complement operation, wh ich
is indirectly needed by 8847 items.
– The constructor whose idempotence is most frequently needed ind irectly is
the binary union of two sets, which is indirectly needed by 69184 items . The
idempotence of binary set intersection takes second place: it is indir ectly
needed by 24249 items.
2 This is arguably a curiosity of the organization of the MML. It turns out that asymmetry
of ∈ is used very early on in the logical construction of the MML, hence its outsized inﬂuence.
3 To be precise, the operation is deﬁned not on topological spaces, but on topological
structures, which one can think of simply as a class of structures that ha s a carrier and a
topology, viz., a collection of subsets of the carrier. A top ological structure on its own is not
assumed to have any properties beyond these.
9
– Several items in the Mizar Mathematical Library indirectly depend on more
than 100 constructor properties. The item with the greatest num ber of
dependencies is taken from the proof of the Jordan curve theore m:
1 t h e o r e m
2 for n being E l e m e n t of NAT
3 for C being b e i n g _ s i m p l e _ c l o s e d _ c u r v e
4 Subset of ( TOP - REAL 2)
5 st n i s _ s u f f i c i e n t l y _ l a r g e _ f o r C
6 holds cell ( Gauge (C , n ) ,
7 X - S p a n S t a r t(C , n ) - ’1 ,
8 Y - S p a n S t a r t(C , n ))
9 misses C
10 proof
11 assume n i s _ s u f f i c i e n t l y _ l a r g e _ f o r C ;
12 then cell ( Gauge (C , n ) ,
13 X - S p a n S t a r t(C , n ) - ’1 ,
14 Y - S p a n S t a r t(C , n )) c = BDD C by Th6 ;
15 hence thesis by J O R D A N 1 A :15 , X B O O L E _ 1 :63;
16 end ;
The precise mathematical deﬁnitions, the theorem references ( Th6, JORDAN1A:15,
etc.) and the proof here are not important. What is important is tha t we
are dealing here with a very short proof (it has only three steps) of a the-
orem along the way to a substantial landmark in formal mathematics . De-
spite appearances, this theorem indirectly depends on fully 113 con structor
properties.
The formalization in Mizar of the Jordan curve theorem required a great
deal of work and made heavy use of the Mizar system’s features, such as
its support for constructor properties under discussion here. W e see this by
virtue of the fact that the theorems of the series of Mizar articles leading
to the ﬁnal proof of the Jordan curve theorem indirectly need, on average,
several dozen constructor properties.
6 Conclusion and future work
The abstractions discovered here in the context of an interactive theorem
prover could, in all probability, be discovered equally well by an ATP. W ith
an automated theorem prover one could, in principle, go much furth er than
we have gone here. An infrastructure for carrying out such explo ration (sound
translation of Mizar proofs to a vanilla unsorted ﬁrst-order language, infras-
tructure for constructing and working with the associated ATP pr oblems, etc.)
already exists [ ?]. One could even verify the dependency claims made here out-
side of Mizar, in the style of [ ?].
When we discover that some property of a function or relation is nee ded, we
are discovering not that the property is logically or mathematically ne eded for
10
the success of the theorem in question; instead, we are discoverin g only that
there exists a formal deduction (viz., a Mizar proof) where this property is
used. It is certainly quite possible that there would exist other form al proofs
of the same theorem that do not use the property. This suggests a much
more ambitious project: discovering new proofs of theorems that use much
less than what an interactively constructed proof uses. Such pro spects are
enticing, and deserve to be carried out. Such a project naturally a lso bears on
the philosophical problem of when two proofs are “the same”: it cou ld very
well be that there are two proofs of the same theorem, one which e xploits
a property of a function or relation, and another which doesn’t, bu t which
should nonetheless, from another perspective, be considered ide ntical.
Constructor properties are but one mechanism in Mizar that hides premises
of inferences. Mizar also supports so-called requirements, which also help to
allow one to reason validly without having to be explicit about precisely w hat
premises are needed for every inference of a proof. Mizar also has some built-in
functionality concerning arithmetic. Both of these mechanisms are of great
value for the formalizer when constructing a formal proof, but if o ne is in-
terested in making explicit premises that were suppressed during pr oof con-
struction, Mizar’s requirements and arithmetic facilities need to be taken into
account.
One might wonder why there are only the nine constructor propert ies sup-
ported by Mizar. Binary relation transitivity, unary function surjectivity and
injectivity, for example, are conspicuously absent. Supporting su ch additional
function and relation properties could be quite valuable; Mizar itself and tools
using its library could exploit function injectivity and surjectivity, fo r exam-
ple, to help rule out the solution for certain search problems that re quire the
domain of discourse to be ﬁnite (see [ ?]). But more generally, it would be valu-
able to mine the Mizar Mathematical Library for common shapes of formulas
that play a large inferential role, and which could naturally be promot ed to
the level of constructor properties. One might discover fruitful properties that
could help make formalization in Mizar even more appealing and practical.