OntoM athP RO Ontology:
A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics
Olga Nevzorova1,2, Nikita Zhiltsov 1, Alexander Kirillovich1, and
Evgeny Lipachev1
1 Kazan Federal University,
Kremlyovskaya 18 Str., 420008 Kazan, Russia
{onevzoro,nikita.zhiltsov,alik.kirillovich,elipachev}@gmail.com
2 Research Institute of Applied Semiotics of Tatarstan Academy of Sciences,
Baumana 20 Str., 420111 Kazan, Russia
Abstract. In this paper, we present an ontology of mathematical knowl-
edge concepts that covers a wide range of the ﬁelds of mathematics and
introduces a balanced representation between comprehensive and sensi-
ble models. We demonstrate the applications of this representation in
information extraction, semantic search, and education. We argue that
the ontology can be a core of future integration of math-aware data
sets in the Web of Data and, therefore, provide mappings onto relevant
datasets, such as DBpedia and ScienceWISE.
Keywords: Ontology engineering, mathematical knowledge, Linking Open
Data
1 Introduction
Recent advances in computer mathematics [4] have made it possible to formalize
particular mathematical areas including the proofs of some remarkable results
(e.g. Four Color Theorem or Kepler’s Conjecture). Nevertheless, the creation of
computer mathematics models is a slow process, requiring the excellent skills
both in mathematics and programming. In this paper, we follow a diﬀerent
paradigm to mathematical knowledge representation that is based on ontology
engineering and the Linked Data principles [6]. OntoMath P RO ontology1 intro-
duces a reasonable trade-oﬀ between plain vocabularies and highly formalized
models, aiming at computable proof-checking.
OntoMath P RO was ﬁrst brieﬂy presented as a part of our previous work [22].
Since then, we have elaborated the ontology structure, improved interlinking
with external resources and developed new applications to support the utility
of the ontology in various use cases. In summary, our key novel contributions in
the current paper are:
– new links with external resources, such as DBpedia and ScienceWISE (Sec-
tion 2.4);
1 http://ontomathpro.org
arXiv:1407.4833v2  [cs.AI]  11 Aug 2014
2 Nevzorova et al.
– a concept-based mathematical formula search mashup (Section 3.2);
– experimental results on using the ontology in the learning process (Sec-
tion 3.3).
1.1 Motivation
The advent of the Web of Data [8] has opened many promising technologies to
publish heterogeneous data from diﬀerent content providers as a single inter-
connected cloud of objects. We argue that the beneﬁts of having an ontological
model for mathematics and publishing mathematical knowledge as Linked Data
include uniﬁcation of the terminology for mathematicians, the convenient rep-
resentation for applications in text mining and search, assistance in learning
about mathematics, and the possibility of predicting unknown links between
mathematical concepts.
Interoperability. Organizing scientiﬁc knowledge is utterly important for
distributed teams working on large research projects. For example, it is illus-
trated by the emergence of ScienceWISE project [1] and its ontology 2 for physi-
cists in CERN. Since OntoMath P RO has better coverage than Wikipedia re-
garding the developing vocabulary and particularly object properties, it can
serve as the main repository for deﬁnitions of mathematical concepts in the Web
of Data. It means that mathematicians may unambiguously refer to the ontology
concepts via URIs on discussion groups, blogs, and trendy Q&A sites, such as
MathOverﬂow3. For this purpose, we provide a URI lookup service as well as a
URI dereferencing service (Section 2.2).
Convenient format for mashups . The integrated representation of math-
ematical knowledge in a machine-readable format (RDF) may boost the devel-
opment of new handy services, i.e., Semantic Web agents, for mathematicians.
Such services could be run atop the ontology as well as datasets, modeled with
the help of the ontology. In Section 3, we present our demo applications in text
mining and mathematical formula search, which exploit the ontology as a rich
linguistic resource.
Learning. From the learner’s perspective, the ontology gives the helpful con-
text for conceiving a mathematical term, including the deﬁnition, related con-
cepts with respect to non-trivial relations, such as logical dependency and associ-
ation. Besides, we argue that the ontology can facilitate educational assessment
of students. In Section 3.3, we describe our experiments on usingOntoMath P RO
as a tool for measuring the eﬀectiveness of the course on numerical analysis.
Discovering hidden links . The ontological model generally deﬁnes not
only concepts from the domain of interest, but also relations between them
and axioms (e.g. transitivity or cardinality of relations). Thus, ontologies may
enable inference over knowledge bases of facts. OntoMath P RO has a rich set of
relations between mathematical concepts. We expect that existing link prediction
techniques (e.g. [9,23,28]) along with reasoning mechanisms (e.g. [24]) may reveal
2 http://sciencewise.info/ontology/
3 http://mathoverflow.net/
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 3
compelling hidden relationships between known concepts in mathematics. Such
discovered highly probable relations may guide further research in the bleeding
edge of mathematics, highlighting the most prospective directions.
1.2 Related W ork
To put our research into the context, we summarize the most relevant previ-
ous works for representing mathematical knowledge in this section. For a more
comprehensive overview of services, ontological models and languages for math-
ematical knowledge management on the Semantic Web and beyond, we refer the
interested reader to C. Lange’s survey [19].
Symbolic notation. The semantic layer of Mathematical Markup Language
(MathML) [3,14] – Content MathML – as well as OpenMath Content Dictionar-
ies [10] are extensible collections of deﬁnitions of symbols. Basically, they suﬃce
high school and sophomore level education: arithmetics, set theory, calculus, al-
gebra, etc. Each symbol has its own URI. In comparison, OntoMath P RO does
not contain deﬁnitions of symbols and could be easily integrated with Content
MathML/OpenMath dictionaries.
High-level ontologies. Next, we overview ontologies for representing high-
level structures in the mathematical knowledge: OMDoc [17,18], MathLang’s
Document Rhetorical aspect (DRa) Ontology [16], Mocassin Ontology [26]. These
models enable making closely related assertions for the particular ﬁelds of math-
ematics, i.e., theories. Comparing to them, OntoMath P RO rather speciﬁes the-
ories themselves.
Open Mathematical Documents (OMDoc), an XML-based language, is inte-
grated with MathML/OpenMath and adds support of statements, theories, and
rhetorical structures to formalize mathematical documents. OMDoc has been
used for interaction between structured speciﬁcation systems and automated
theorem provers. The OMDoc OWL Ontology 4 is based on the notion of state-
ments. Sub-statement structures include deﬁnitions, theorems, lemmas, corollar-
ies, proof steps. The relation set comprises of partonomic (whole-part), logical
dependency, and verbalizing properties. The paper [11] presents an OMDoc-
based approach to author mathematical lecture notes and expose them as Linked
Data.
The MathLang DRa Ontology characterizes document structure elements
according to their mathematical rhetorical roles that are similar to the ones
deﬁned in the statement level of OMDoc. This semantics focuses on formalizing
proof skeletons for generation of proof checker templates.
The Mocassin Ontology encompasses many structural elements of the state-
of-the-art models. However, this model is more oriented on representing struc-
tural elements that occur in real scholarly papers on mathematics. Our previous
work [26] demonstrates its utility in the information extraction scenario.
T erminological vocabularies. The general-purpose DBpedia dataset [2]
contains, according to our estimates, about 7,800 concepts (including 1,500 con-
4 Available at http://kwarc.info/projects/docOnto/omdoc.html
4 Nevzorova et al.
cepts with labels in Russian) from algebra, 46,000 (9,200) concepts from geom-
etry, 30,000 (4,300) concepts from mathematical logic, 150,000 (28,000) from
mathematical analysis, and 165,000 (39,000) concepts on theory of probability
and statistics. Concepts are linked to DBpedia categories representing the ﬁelds
of mathematics. Although there is a skos:broader relation between categories,
there is no taxonomic (ISA) relationship between the concepts themselves.
A SKOS-based adaptation of Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation5 is exposed
as a linked dataset [20]. OntoMath P RO ontology overlaps with this dataset in
case of modeling hierarchy of ﬁelds, but it is signiﬁcantly richer for representing
terms and their interactions.
The Online Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences [25] is a knowledge base of
facts about numbers. Given a sequence of integers, this service 6 returns the
information about its name, general formula, implementation in programming
languages, successive numbers, references, and other relevant links.
Thesauri and ontologies . Hence, let us consider domain-speciﬁc resources,
providing a more rich set of relations. [15] presents a formal ontology of math-
ematics for engineers that covers abstract algebra and metrology. Cambridge
Mathematical Thesaurus [29] contains a taxonomy of about 4,500 entities in 9
languages from the undergraduate level mathematics, connected with logical de-
pendency referencedBy and associative relationships seeAlso. This resource has
been developed in education purposes and covers only bachelor level mathemat-
ics.
The ScienceWISE project ontology [1] gives over 2,500 mathematical deﬁ-
nitions connected with ISA-, whole-part, associative, and importance relation-
ships. The sources of deﬁnitions are Wikipedia, Encyclopedia of Science, and the
engaged research community. The project focuses on achieving a consensus of
opinion among mathematicians about given deﬁnitions.
The Ontology on Natural Sciences and Technology [12] contains 55,000 de-
scriptions of scientiﬁc terms in Russian, covering the mathematical terminology
on high school and freshman-sophomore university levels. The ontology is meant
for applications of text analysis, and deﬁnes thesaurus-like relations, such as
ISA, whole-part, asymmetric association, and symmetric association.
Due to the lack of space, we do not cover related works on semantic data
analysis for mathematical texts, which are given in [7,21].
2 OntoM athP RO Structure
In this section, we elaborate the modeling principles, the development workﬂow,
the ontology structure, and links to external terminological resources.
2.1 Modeling Principles
Even though mathematics is the most exact science, modeling this domain is
hard, due to:
5 http://www.ams.org/msc/
6 http://oeis.org
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 5
– abstractness, i.e., many deﬁnitions are conventionally given in mathematical
notation elements or formulas;
– duality, i.e., there might be equivalent deﬁnitions for terms depending on
which foundations of mathematics are used (set theory or geometry) – this
aggravates asserting logical dependency relations between concepts;
– emergence of novel terms , i.e., developing, not commonly used parts of the
vocabulary in the professional community.
To tackle these issues, we come up with the following modeling principles.
1. Only classes, no individuals . First, OntoMath P RO is geared to be a lin-
guistic resource for text processing. Therefore, the ontology does not contain
individuals. The latter can be found in applications, e.g. concrete occurrences
of named entities in texts. For example, while modeling mathematical num-
bers like π ore as individuals is natural, we model them as classes, because,
in our case, individuals can be occurrences of these numbers in texts.
2. ISA vs. whole-part. Existing classiﬁcation schemes, such as MSC or UDC7,
model hierarchies with respect to whole-part relation. Unlike them, our on-
tology posits the ISA semantics for hierarchies of mathematical knowledge
objects, and preserves the same for ﬁelds and sub-ﬁelds. The reason is that
there are only classes instead of individuals in OntoMath P RO, we express
the whole-part semantics through ISA relation taking into account its in-
terpretability in terms of the set theory. Thus, we assume that a ﬁeld of
mathematics is a set of closely related statements. For example, fractal ge-
ometry is a sub-set of geometry.
3. V alidating classes. We deal with the developing vocabulary. To avoid coin-
ing a rare terminology, we require a reference from a refereed publication (i.e.,
an article or a textbook) for a term to be added to the ontology.
4. V alidating relations. Establishing correct relation instances is hard and
requires high-level competence. Therefore, we basically rely on the opinions
of experienced experts involved in the development. The exceptions include
the logical dependency and solves relations that can be validated using ref-
erences to refereed sources (see our explanation in Section 2.3).
5. URI naming convention. Since the ontology is bilingual (Russian/English)
and our experts had started adding terms with Russian labels and trans-
lated them to English afterwards, we choose using surrogate URIs, e.g.
http://ontomathpro.org/ontology/E1 for a concept “Field of mathemat-
ics”8.
6. Multiple inheritance. Multiple inheritance with respect to ISA-relationships
is permitted. For example, class E1892 Diﬀerential Equation is a sub-class
of both E1891 Equation and E2688 Element of Diﬀerential Equations.
7. Synset as labels . Synonyms are represented by labels of the same class.
For example, E1226 Cauchy’s Inequality has labels “Cauchy’s inequality”
and “Inequality of arithmetic and geometric means”.
7 http://www.udcc.org/
8 the similar convention was adopted in CIDOC CRM Ontology [13]
6 Nevzorova et al.
We have worked with seven practicing mathematicians as domain experts
for four months. The terminological sources include freely available materials,
such as classical textbooks, Wikipedia articles, and real scholarly papers, along
with personal experience of the experts. During the development, we used a
collaborative tool WebProtege9 [31].
2.2 Concepts
Each concept is represented as an OWL class in the ontology. Each class has a
textual explanation or hyperlink to its external deﬁnition, Russian and English
labels. All the metadata information, including adjacent properties, per each
class can be seen on our URI dereferencing service10. To facilitate ﬁnding the URI
for a given class (e.g. for adding a link to it on a webpage), this service features
a URI lookup function. In future, we are going to add collecting backlinks per
each class from HTTP referrers. It will allow us to display relevant webpages
and discussions about the concept.
Fig. 1. A taxonomy of the ﬁelds of mathematics in OntoM athP RO
We distinguish two hierarchies of classes with respect to ISA-relationship:
a taxonomy of the ﬁelds of mathematics (Figure 1) and a taxonomy of mathe-
matical knowledge objects, i.e., elements of particular theories (Figure 2). In the
taxonomy of ﬁelds, most fundamental ﬁelds, such as geometry and analysis, have
been elaborated thoroughly. For example, there have been deﬁned speciﬁc sub-
ﬁelds of geometry: analytic geometry, diﬀerential geometry, fractal geomentry
9 http://webprotege.stanford.edu/
10 according to the Linked Data principles, it is available on the ontology’s URI:
http://ontomathpro.org/ontology
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 7
and others. The ontology covers a wide range of the ﬁelds of mathematics, such
as number theory, set theory, algebra, analysis, geometry, mathematical logic,
discrete mathematics, theory of computation, diﬀerential equations, numerical
analysis, probability theory, and statistics.
There are three types of top level concepts in the taxonomy of mathematical
knowledge objects: i) basic metamathematical concepts, e.g. E847 Set, E1227
Operator, E1324 Map, etc; ii) root elements of the concepts related to the par-
ticular ﬁelds of mathematics, e.g. E2406 Element of Probability Theory or E3140
Element of Numerical Analysis; iii) common scientiﬁc concepts: E339 Problem,
E449 Method, E1936 Statement, E1988 Formula, etc. Most concepts are inher-
ited from the root elements of the ﬁelds of mathematics (type ii).
Fig. 2. A taxonomy of mathematical knowledge objects in OntoM athP RO
In total, OntoMath P RO contains 3,449 classes.
2.3 Relations
OntoMath P RO deﬁnes four types of object properties:
– a directed relation between a mathematical knowledge object (E24) and a
ﬁeld of mathematics (E1) ( P3 belongs to and its inverse P4 contains ), e.g.
E68 Barycentric Coordinates P3 belongs to E14 Metric Geometry;
– a directed relation of logical dependency between mathematical knowledge
objects ( P1 deﬁnes and its inverse P2 is deﬁned by ), e.g. E39 Christoﬀel
Symbol P2 is deﬁned by E213 Connectedness. This relation can be validated
with providing a reference to the relevant deﬁnition in a refereed publication.
The P2 is deﬁned by relation instance is established, if the deﬁnition of the
ﬁrst concept (“subject” in the triple) explicitly refers to the second concept
(“object”);
8 Nevzorova et al.
– a symmetric transitive associative relation between mathematical knowl-
edge objects ( P5 see also ), e.g. E660 Chebyshev Iterative Method P5 see
also E444 Numerical Solution of Linear Equation Systems. The semantics of
this relation is equivalent to rdfs:seeAlso, which is widely used in the LOD
datasets for individuals;
– a directed relation between a method and a task (P6 solves and its inverseP7
is solved by), these properties are deﬁned on E449 Method and E339 Problem
classes. This relation can also be validated using references to refereed articles
or textbooks.
In total, OntoMath P RO contains 3,627 ISA property instances, and 1,139
other property instances.
2.4 Links to Other Datasets
Although external links are no part of the ontology, we describe the subsets
that have been mapped onto existing Linked Data resources. An alignment of
OntoMath P RO with DBpedia 11 is based on the following features:
– class and resource labels ( rdfs:label property);
– explicit links to Wikipedia, i.e., during the development of the ontology,
some deﬁnitions were imported from Wikipedia and refer to it. We compare
these references with foaf:primaryTopic and rdfs:labels property values in
DBpedia.
For interlinking, we only use DBpedia resources that belong to the Mathemat-
ics category and its subcategories (e.g. Algebra, Geometry, Mathematical logic,
Dynamical Systems) up to 5 levels with respect to skos:broader property. After
the linking has been accomplished, we generate triples connecting the classes of
the OntoMath P RO with the resources from DBpedia by using skos:closeMatch
property. The alignment with DBpedia has resulted in 947 connections with 907
the ontology classes (some classes were linked with several DBpedia resources).
An alignment with ScienceWISE Ontology 12 only used class labels. As a
result, this mapping comprises 347 connections. The mapping ﬁles are available
on GitHub13.
3 Applications
In this section, we describe the applications, which exploit diﬀerent aspects of
OntoMath P RO.
11 SPARQL endpoint: http://dbpedia.org/sparql
12 http://data.sciencewise.info/openrdf-sesame/repositories/SW
13 https://github.com/CLLKazan/OntoMathPro
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 9
3.1 Information Extraction
In our previous work [22], we have developed a semantic publishing platform for
scientiﬁc collections in mathematics that analyzes the underlying semantics in
mathematical scholarly papers and eﬀectively builds their consolidated ontology-
based representation.
Thus, every paper in the collection is dissected into a semantic graph of
instances of the supported domain models with the help of NLP techniques, such
as noun phrase recognition and entity resolution. Along with textual fragments,
the platform is capable to understand the meanings of mathematical notation
symbols and interpret them as ontology instances.
The corpus of publications we experimented with consists of 1,330 articles
of the “Proceedings of Higher Education Institutions: Mathematics” (PHEIM)
journal in Russian. The current RDF dataset14 – PHEIM dataset – contains more
than 850,000 triples including the descriptions of 1,330 articles, 17,397 formulas,
43,963 variables, and 66,434 textual occurrences of mathematical entities from
the ontology.
3.2 Concept-based F ormula Search
Approach. Our demo application 15 supports a use case of searching mathe-
matical formulas in the published PHEIM dataset that are relevant to a given
entity. The user input supported by the application is close to a keyword search:
our system is agnostic to a particular symbolic notation used in the papers to
denote mathematical concepts, and the user is able to ﬁlter query suggestions
by keywords. This feature makes our application diﬀerent from a wide range
of mathematical retrieval systems that require the input in the L ATEX syntax
(e.g. [27,33,35]). Such approaches usually suﬀer from ambiguous mathematical
notations. However, it’s worth mentioning (uni)quation [32], a formula search
system that is robust to basic formula transformations including changes of
variables.
Another rationale behind the concept-based search input interface is its cross-
language capabilities, i.e., even though the indexed document collection is in
Russian, the user still can search using keywords in English.
There have been a few eﬀorts to enable a keyword search for retrieving math-
ematical content. A computational engine WolframAlpha [34] can handle key-
word queries, generating a summary for a mathematical concept. However, the
engine does not provide the similar functionality for documents in scientiﬁc col-
lections. MCAT Math Retrieval System [30] applies an SVM classiﬁer to detect
descriptions of mathematical expressions and extends the TF-IDF ranking base-
line for formula search in MathML documents. Unlike this tool, our solution is
more powerful, because it resolves the lexical meanings of symbols in terms of
14 is exposed via our SPARQL endpoint: http://cll.niimm.ksu.ru:8890/sparql, the
graph IRI is http://cll.niimm.ksu.ru/pheim
15 http://cll.niimm.ksu.ru/mathsearch
10 Nevzorova et al.
OntoMath P RO ontology, and, therefore, enabling reasoning with respect to the
ontology relations (e.g. ISA). Additionally, our search interface supports ﬁltering
by the document structure context, i.e., a particular segment of the document
(e.g. a theorem or a deﬁnition) that contains the relevant formula.
Fig. 3. Query interface of the mathematical formula search demo application
Demo. The application supplies the following search scenario. The user en-
ters keywords in the search box (Figure 3) and may choose a related concept
suggestion. The suggestions are loaded from OntoMath P ROontology as well as
the DBpedia part aligned with the ontology.
Fig. 4. A search result page
Then, the user clicks the “Get instances” button and gets a list of search
results (Figure 4). The hit descriptions are represented as table rows with the
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 11
contextual information. Speciﬁcally, the application provides a symbolic inter-
pretation of the chosen concept, the relevant formula, in which the notation
element occurs, and the context, i.e., the document part, which contains the
formula. Providing notation examples is instructive, because the same concept
may be expressed in diﬀerent documents using diﬀerent symbols depending on
the authors’ writing style. Additionally, the user can reﬁne the context of search
results selecting proper checkboxes standing for particular document parts.
Finally, the user can examine the paper, which contains the relevant formula
after clicking on the “Details” button (Figure 5). This screen provides the rel-
evant formula, the matched concepts as well as the related article information
including links to its metadata page and PDF.
Fig. 5. A search result details page
We would like to note that the current search result set does not cover all
the concepts deﬁned in OntoMath P RO ontology. The reason is twofold: i) the
data set is quite limited; ii) many named entities are usually not expressed in a
symbolic notation (e.g. theorems or the ﬁelds of mathematics).
From the engineering perspective, our demo application is a lightweight
mashup that consumes the published RDF data set. It is written in JavaScript
and queries our SPARQL endpoint.
3.3 Education
In this subsection, we describe our experiments on ontology-based assessment
of the competence of students, who attended a course on numerical analysis
instructed by one of the authors for 3-year undergraduate students at our uni-
versity.
Most conventional approaches to assessment of students still tend to evaluate
how much a student knows about the subject. However, problem-based learning
is proven to be a more eﬀective approach [5]. For a practicing mathematician,
an ability of ﬁnding a method for solving a concrete task is crucial. The pro-
ﬁcient solver must realize relationships between particular methods, tasks and
12 Nevzorova et al.
other mathematical concepts, i.e., “know how to conceive a holistic image of the
discipline”16. We propose to consider an ontology as a close approximation to
such an image.
For our experiments, we extracted a small fragment ofOntoMath P RO ontol-
ogy (Figure 6). It contains taxonomies of tasks and solving methods for systems
of linear equations (numerical analysis) as well as relationships between them.
We added a few relevant concepts that were not deﬁned in the ontology due to
questionable deﬁnitions, e.g. “a task of solving a system of linear equations with
the coeﬃcient matrix of order m*m, case m> 100”. However, such concepts are
useful for testing pragmatic competence.
Concerning the course coverage, only a few methods from the fragment were
out of its scope. There is an assumption that students may have studied them
during their research work.
The experiment participants are 25 students who attended the course and
had high overall grades. They are 3-year undergraduate students (who have not
yet passed the exam on the course), 1- and 2-year master students, and Ph.D.
students. Each participant is given a list of classes and asked to link them using
only two relationships (ISA and P6 solves ).
Then, we stated a hypothesis that the participants’ results have to correlate
with their experience. We use standard performance measures for classiﬁcation
tasks, such as precision (P), recall (R), and F-score = 2 · P ∗R
P +R.
Fig. 6. A part of the correct solution for the interlinking task, the arrows mean P6
solves relation instances
We emphasize the importance of applying a reasoning mechanism during the
calculation of experimental results. For the evaluation, we materialize all facts
that might be acquired after reasoning. For example, a relationship P6 solves
is inherited through both the taxonomies of methods and task. Thus, if the
participant links correctly more speciﬁc classes, it results in lower recall, but
does not aﬀect precision.
16 translated from the Russian Federal Standard for Higher Education on mathemat-
ics for master students, Section 5.2: http://www.edu.ru/db-mon/mo/Data/d_10/
prm40-1.pdf
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 13
T able 1. Average results of interlinking ontology concepts from a course on numerical
analysis for diﬀerent groups of students. P means precision, R – recall, F – F-score.
Group of students ISA T asks ISA Methods P6 solves T otal
P R F P R F P R F P R F
3-year undergraduates 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.76 0.59 0.67 0.46 0.27 0.34 0.69 0.50 0.58
1-year masters 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.79 0.63 0.70 0.43 0.26 0.32 0.70 0.52 0.59
2-year masters 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.65 0.55 0.59 0.51 0.37 0.41 0.63 0.52 0.56
Ph.D. candidates 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.86 0.63 0.71 0.61 0.23 0.33 0.82 0.50 0.62
Table 1 shows the results of the interlinking done by the participants. As
expected, establishing links in the simplistic taxonomy of tasks have been done
well by all participants. The reconstruction of a slightly complex taxonomy of
methods has signiﬁcantly lower performance values and correlates with the back-
ground of participants. Again as expected, classiﬁcation of P6 solves relations
turns out to be the hardest part. Interestingly, the performance values for this
subtask correlates less with the level of participants: Ph.D. students give less
complete results, than not so experienced participants. A possible explanation
comes from the fact that Ph.D. students have chosen their speciﬁc directions of
research, which might not overlap with systems of linear equations as a sub-ﬁeld
of numerical analysis. That’s why they classify tasks and methods very well,
but prefer to keep in mind relationships about solution methods that are only
relevant to their area of expertise.
Finally, we may conclude that the proposed approach could be used for eval-
uation of the competence of students.
4 Conclusion
We present OntoMath P RO, an OWL ontology that is geared to be the hub of
mathematical knowledge in the Web of Data. Relying on this representation
model, we are going to create an ecosystem of datasets and mashups around the
ontology to beneﬁt mathematicians from diﬀerent backgrounds – from under-
graduate students to experts. In this paper, we describe the ﬁrst steps towards
it. In particular, interlinking with other Linked Data datasets, the applications
in information extraction, semantic search of mathematical formulas, learning
are discussed.
We emphasize that although the ontology has achieved maturity, it is the
result of ongoing work. We share the sources with the Semantic Web commu-
nity and organize the further collaborative development of the ontology and its
applications on the project page ontomathpro.org to engage our colleagues and
mathematicians from elsewhere.
As a future research work, we plan to study topic fusion in educational math-
ematical documents, such as lecture notes and textbooks, through occurrences
of concepts from diﬀerent taxonomies of the ontology. Additionally, we will ad-
dress applications of ontology reconstruction in learning purposes (as described
14 Nevzorova et al.
in Section 3.3), and are going to extend this approach on other ﬁelds of knowl-
edge.
Acknowledgments. This work was funded by the subsidy allocated to Kazan
Federal University for the state assignment in the sphere of scientiﬁc activities.
The authors would like to thank V. Solovyev, A. Kayumova, I. Kayumov, P.
Ivanshin, E. Utkina, and M. Matvejchuk, who have contributed to the ontol-
ogy, as well as the students at Kazan Federal University, who took part in the
experiments. The authors are also very grateful to A. Elizarov for his support,
E. Khakimova (University of Virginia) for the assistance in writing the related
work section, and three anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions.
References
1. Aberer, K., Boyarsky, A., Cudr-Mauroux, P., Demartini, G., Ruchayskiy, O. Sci-
enceWISE: A Web-based Interactive Semantic Platform for Scientiﬁc Collabora-
tion. In: 10th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2011 - Demo) (2011)
2. Auer S. et al. Dbpedia: A Nucleus for a Web of Open Data. The semantic web.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 722-735 (2007)
3. Ausbrooks, R. et al. Mathematical Markup Language (MathML) Version 3.0. W3C
Candidate Recommendation of 15 December 2009. World Wide Web Consortium.
Vol. 13. (2009)
4. Barendregt, H., Wiedijk, F. The Challenge of Computer Mathematics. Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 363 (1835), pp. 2351–2375. (2005)
5. Barrows, H. S. A Taxonomy of Problembased Learning Methods. Medical educa-
tion. Vol. 20. No. 6. pp. 481–486 (1986)
6. Berners-Lee, T. Linked Data – Design Issues (2006) http://www.w3.org/
DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
7. Biryaltsev, E.V., Elizarov, A.M., Zhiltsov, N.G., Lipachev, E.K., Nevzorova, O.A.,
Solovyev, V.D. Methods for analyzing semantic data of electronic collections in
mathematics. Automatic Documentation and Mathematical Linguistics. Vol. 48.
No. 2. pp. 81-85 (2014)
8. Bizer, C., Heath, T., Berners-Lee, T. Linked Data – The Story So Far. International
journal on semantic web and information systems. Vol. 5. No. 3. pp. 1-22. (2009)
9. Bordes, A. et al. Translating Embeddings for Modeling Multi-relational Data. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp. 2787–2795. (2013)
10. Buswell S. et al. The Open Math Standard. Version 2.0. Technical report, The
Open Math Society, 2004. http://www.openmath.org/standard/om20. (2004)
11. David, C., Kohlhase, M., Lange, C., Rabe, F., Zhiltsov, N., Zholudev, V. Publishing
Math Lecture Notes as Linked Data. In: ESWC Proceedings, pp. 370–375 (2010)
12. Dobrov, B., Loukachevitch, N. Development of Linguistic Ontology on Natural
Sciences and Technology. In: Proceedings of Linguistic resources and Evaluation
conference (LREC 2006), pp. 1077-1082 (2006)
13. Doerr M. The CIDOC conceptual reference module: an ontological approach to
semantic interoperability of metadata. AI magazine. Vol. 24. No. 3. pp. 75–92
(2003)
OntoM athP RO Ontology: A Linked Data Hub for Mathematics 15
14. Elizarov, A.M., Lipachev, E.L., Malakhaltsev, M.A. Web Technologies for Mathe-
maticians: The Basics of MathML. A Practical Guide. Moscow: Fizmatlit (2010)
[In Russian]
15. Gruber, T., Olsen, G. An Ontology for Engineering Mathematics. KR. – 1994,
pp.258-269.
16. Kamareddine, F., Wells, J. B. Computerizing Mathematical Text with MathLang.
Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science. V. 205. pp. 5-30 (2008)
17. Kohlhase, M. OMDoc – An Open Markup Format for Mathematical Documents
[Version 1.2]. Number 4180 in LNAI. (2006)
18. Lange, C. Enabling Collaboration on Semiformal Mathematical Knowledge by Se-
mantic Web Integration. Vol. 11. IOS Press (2011)
19. Lange, C. Ontologies and Languages for Representing Mathematical Knowledge
on the Semantic Web. Semantic Web. Vol. 4. No. 2. pp. 119–158 (2013)
20. Lange, C., Ion, P., Dimou, A., Bratsas, C., Sperber, W., Kohlhase, M., Antoniou, I.
Bringing Mathematics to the Web of Data: the Case of the Mathematics Subject
Classiﬁcation. In: The Semantic Web, 9th Extended Semantic Web Conference
(ESWC), LNSC, vol. 7295, pp. 763-777, Springer (2012)
21. Nevzorova, O.A., Birialtcev E.V., Zhiltsov, N.G. Mathematical text collections:
Annotation and Application for Search Tasks. Scientiﬁc and Technical Information
Processing. Vol. 40. No. 6, pp. 386-395 (2013)
22. Nevzorova, O., Zhiltsov, N., Zaikin, D., Zhibrik, O., Kirillovich, A., Nevzorov, V.,
Birialtsev, E. Bringing Math to LOD: A Semantic Publishing Platform Prototype
for Scientiﬁc Collections in Mathematics. 12th International Semantic Web Con-
ference, Sydney, NSW, Australia, October 21-25, 2013, Proceedings, Part I. Vol.
8218. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp 379-394 (2013)
23. Nickel, M., Tresp, V., Kriegel, H. P. A Three-way Model for Collective Learning
on Multi-relational Data. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on
Machine Learning. pp. 809–816 (2011)
24. Sirin, E. et al. Pellet: A Practical OWL-DL Reasoner. Web Semantics: science,
services and agents on the World Wide Web. Vol. 5. No. 2. pp. 51-53 (2007)
25. Sloane, N. The On-line Encyclopedia of integer sequences. Notices of the AMS,
50(8):912 (2003)
26. Solovyev, V., Zhiltsov, N. Logical Structure Analysis of Scientiﬁc Publications in
Mathematics. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence,
Mining and Semantics (WIMS’11), pp. 21:1–21:9. ACM (2011)
27. Springer LaTeX Search, http://www.latexsearch.com
28. Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R., Tenenbaum, J. B. Modelling Relational Data
using Bayesian Clustered Tensor Factorization. NIPS. pp. 1821-1828 (2009)
29. Thomas, R. Millenium Mathematics Project – Bringing Mathematics to Life.
MSOR Connections. Vol. 4. No. 3. (2004)
30. Topic, G., Kristianto, G.Y., Nghiem, M.-Q., Aizawa, A. The MCAT Math Re-
trieval System for NTCIR-10 Math Track. In: Proceedings of the 10th NTCIR
Conference.– 2013.
31. Tudorache, T., Vendetti, J., Noy, N. F. Web-Protege: A Lightweight OWL Ontol-
ogy Editor for the Web. OWLED. Vol. 432 (2008)
32. (uni)quation, http://uniquation.com
33. Wikipedia Formula Search, http://shinh.org/wfs
34. WolframAlpha, http://www.wolframalpha.com
35. Wolfram Formula Search, http://functions.wolfram.com/formulasearch