
--- PAGE 1 ---
Concept Graph Learning from Educational Data
Yiming Yang, Hanxiao Liu, Jaime Carbonell, Wanli Ma
CarnegieMellonUniversity
{yiming, hanxiaol, jgc, mawanli}@cs.cmu.edu
ABSTRACT 1. INTRODUCTION
Thispaperaddressesanopenchallengeineducationaldata The large and growing amounts of online education data
mining, i.e., the problem of using observed prerequisite re- present both open challenges and significant opportunities
lations among courses to learn a directed universal con- for machine learning research to enrich educational offer-
cept graph, and using the induced graph to predict un- ings. One of the most important challenges is to automat-
observed prerequisite relations among a broader range of ically detect the prerequisite dependencies among massive
courses. This is particularly useful to induce prerequisite quantities of online courses, and to support decision mak-
relations among courses from different providers (universi- ing such as curricula planning for students, and to support
ties, MOOCs, etc.). We propose a new framework for in- course and curriculum design by teachers based on existing
ference within and across two graphs—at the course level courseofferings. Oneexampleistofindacoherentsequence
and at the induced concept level—which we call Concept of courses among MOOC offerings from different providers
Graph Learning (CGL). In the training phase, our system that respect implicit prerequisite relations. A more specific
projects the course-level links onto the concept space to in- example would be a new student who just enters a univer-
ducedirectedconceptlinks;inthetestingphase,theconcept sity for a MS or PhD degree. She is interested in machine
links are used to predict (unobserved) prerequisite links for learning and data mining courses, but finds it difficult to
test-set courses within the same institution or across insti- chooseamongmanycourseswhichlooksimilarorwitham-
tutions. The dual mappings enable our system to perform biguouscoursetitlestoher,suchasMachine Learning, Sta-
an interlingua-style transfer learning, e.g. treating the con- tistical Machine Learning, Applied Machine Learning, Ma-
ceptgraphastheinterlingua,andinducingprerequisitelinks chine Learning with Large Datasets, Scalable Analytics, Ad-
in a transferable manner across different universities. Ex- vancedDataAnalysis,Statistics: DataMining,Intermediate
periments on our newly collected data sets of courses from Statistics, Statistical Computing, and so on. Taking all the
MIT, Caltech, Princeton and CMU show promising results, courses would imply taking forever to graduate, and possi-
including the viability of CGL for transfer learning. bly waste a big portion of her time due to the overlapping
content. Alternately, if she wants to choose a small sub-
CategoriesandSubjectDescriptors set, which courses should she include? How should she or-
der the courses without sufficient understanding about the
I.2.6 [Learning]: Concept learning; Induction; Parameter prerequisite dependencies? Often prerequisites are explicit
learning; I.5.2 [Design Methodology]: Pattern analysis; within an academic department but implicit across depart-
Classifier design and evaluation ments. Moreover, if she already took several courses in ma-
chine learning or data mining through Coursera or in her
GeneralTerms undergraduate education, how much do those courses over-
lap with the new ones? Without an accurate representa-
Algorithms;Performance;Design;Experimentation;Theory
tionabouthowcoursecontentsoverlapwitheachother,and
how course ordering would affect the efficiency or difficulty
Keywords
of learning by students, it is difficult to answer her ques-
Multi-scaledirectedgraphlearning;onlineeducation;trans- tions. Universities solve this problem in the old-fashioned
fer learning; new inference algorithms way, via academic advisors, but it is not clear how to solve
itinMOOCenvironmentsorcross-universityofferingswhere
courses do not have unique ID’s and not described in a
universally controlled vocabulary. Ideally, we would like to
Permissiontomakedigitalorhardcopiesofallorpartofthisworkforpersonalor
have a universal graph whose nodes are canonical and dis-
classroomuseisgrantedwithoutfeeprovidedthatcopiesarenotmadeordistributed
forprofitorcommercialadvantageandthatcopiesbearthisnoticeandthefullcita- criminant concepts (e.g.“convexity”or“eigenvalues”) being
tiononthefirstpage. Copyrightsforcomponentsofthisworkownedbyothersthan taughtinabroadrangeofcourses,andwhoselinksindicate
ACMmustbehonored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orre- pairwisepreferencesinsequencingtheteachingofthesecon-
publish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requirespriorspecificpermission cepts. For example, to learn the concepts of PageRank and
and/orafee.Requestpermissionsfrompermissions@acm.org.
HITS,studentsshouldhavealreadylearnedtheconceptsof
WSDM’15,February2–6,2015,Shanghai,China.
eigenvectors, Markov matrices and irreducibility of matri-
Copyrightisheldbytheowner/author(s).PublicationrightslicensedtoACM.
ACM978-1-4503-3317-7/15/02...$15.00. ces. This means directed links from eigenvectors, Markov
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2684822.2685292.
--- PAGE 2 ---
Courses in University 1 Courses in University 2
E&M Mechanics
Calculus
Differential Eq Matrix A Quantum Matrix A Topology
Algorithms Java Prog
Num Analysis Scalable Algs
Universal Concepts (e.g. Wikipedia Topics)
Figure 1: The framework of two-scale directed graphs: The higher-level graphs have courses (nodes) with
perquisite relations (links). The lower-level graph consists of universal concepts (nodes) and pairwise pref-
erence in learning or teaching concepts. The links between the two levels are system-assigned weights of
concepts to each course.
matrices and irreducibility to PageRank and HITS in the ogy(MIT),theCaliforniaInstituteofTechnology(Caltech),
conceptgraph. Togeneralizethisfurther,iftherearemany theCarnegieMellonUniversity(CMU)andPrinceton. The
directed links from the concepts in one course (say Matrix syllabus data allow us to construct an initial course-level
Algebra)totheconceptsinanothercourse(sayWebMining graph for each university, which may be further enriched
with Link Analysis as a sub-topic), we may infer a prereq- by discovering latent pre-requisite links. As for represent-
uisite relation between the two courses. Clearly, having a ing the universal concept space, we study four representa-
directed graph with a broad coverage of universal concepts tion schemes (Section 2.2), including 1) using the English
iscrucialforreasoningaboutcoursecontentoverlapandpre- words in course descriptions, 2) using sparse coding of En-
requisite relationship, and hence important for educational glishwords,3)usingdistributedwordembeddingofEnglish
decision making, such as curriculum planning by students words, and 4) using a large subset of Wikipedia categories.
andmodularizationincoursesyllabusdesignbyinstructors. For each of these representation schemes, we provide algo-
Howcanweobtainsuchaknowledge-richconceptgraph? rithmic solutions to establish a mapping from courses to
Manualspecificationisobviouslynotscalablewhenthenum- concepts,andtolearntheconcept-leveldependenciesbased
ber of concepts reaches tens of thousands or larger. Using on observed prerequisite relations at the course level. The
machinelearningtoautomaticallyinducesuchagraphbased second part, i.e., the explicit learning of the directed graph
on massive online course materials is an attractive alterna- for universal concepts, is the most unique part of our pro-
tive; however, no statistical learning techniques have been posedframework. Oncetheconceptgraphislearned,wecan
developed for this problem, to our knowledge. Addressing predictunobserved prerequisiterelationsamonganycourses,
this open challenge with principled algorithmic solutions is including those not in the training set and by different uni-
the novel contribution we aim to accomplish in this paper. versities. In other words, CGL enables an interlingua-style
We call our new method Concept Graph Learning (CGL). transfer learning as to train the models on the course ma-
Specifically, we propose a multi-scale inference framework terials of some universities and to predict the prerequisite
as illustrated in Figure 1, which consists of two levels of relationsforthecoursesinotheruniversities. Theuniversal
graphsandcross-levellinks. Generally,acoursewouldcover transferability is particularly desirable in MOOC environ-
multiple concepts, and a concept may be covered by more ments where courses are offered by different instructors in
thanonecourse. Noticethatthecourse-levelgraphsdonot many universities. Since universities do not have unified
overlap because different universities do not have universal course IDs, the course-level sub-graphs of different univer-
courseIDs. However,thesemanticconceptstaughtindiffer- sities do not overlap with each other, and the prerequisite
ent universities do overlap, and we want to learn the map- links are only local within each sub-graph. Thus to enable
pings between the non-universal courses and the universal cross-university transfer, it is crucial to project course-level
concept space based on online course materials. prerequisite links in different universities onto the directed
Inthispaperweinvestigatetheproblemofconceptgraph links among universal concepts.
learning (CGL) with our new collections of syllabi (includ- Thebi-directionalinferencebetweenthetwodirectedgraphs
ing course names, descriptions, listed lectures, prerequisite makes our CGL framework fundamentally different from
relations,etc.) fromtheMassachusettsInstituteofTechnol- existing approaches in graph-based link detection [16, 19,
--- PAGE 3 ---
20], matrix completion [4, 9, 13] and collaborative filtering wordswhosetraining-setfrequencyisone. Wedidnot
[24]. That is, our approach requires explicit learning of the useTF-IDFweightingbecausetherelativesmallnum-
concept-level directed graph and optimal mapping between ber of“documents”(courses) in our data sets do not
the two levels of links while other methods do not (see Sec- allow reliable estimates of the IDF part.
tion 4 for more discussion).
Our main contributions in this paper can be summarized 2. SparseCodingofWords(SCW):Thismethodpro-
as: jectstheoriginaln-dimensionalvectorrepresentations
of words (the columns in the course-by-word matrix)
1. A novel framework for within- and cross-level infer- onto sparse vectors in a smaller k-dimensional space
ence of prerequisite relations at the course-level and usingNon-negativeMatrixFactorization[18],wherek
the concept-level directed graphs; is much smaller than n. One can view the lower di-
mensionalcomponentsasthesystem-discoveredlatent
2. New algorithmic solutions for scalable graph learning;
concepts. Intrigued by the successful application of
3. New data collections from multiple universities with sparsecodinginimageprocessing[11],weexploredits
syllabusdescriptions,prerequisitelinksandlecturema- application to our graph-based inference problem. By
terials; applying the algorithm in [14] to our training sets we
obtainedak-dimensionalvectorforeachword;bytak-
4. The first evaluation for prerequisite link prediction in ing the average of word vectors in each course we ob-
within- and cross-university settings. tainedthebag-of-conceptrepresentationofthecourse.
This resulted in an n-by-k matrix X, representing all
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2
the training-set courses in the k-dimensional space of
introduces the formal definitions of our framework and in-
latent concepts. We set k = 100 in our experiments
ferencealgorithms;Section3describesthenewdatasetswe
based on cross validation.
collected for this study and future benchmark evaluations,
and reports our empirical findings; Section 4 discusses re-
3. DistributedWordEmbedding(DWE):Thismethod
lated work; and Section 5 summarizes the main findings in
also uses dimension-reduced vectors to represent both
this study.
wordsandcourses,similartoSCW.However,thelower
dimensionalvectorsforwordsarediscoveredbymulti-
2. FRAMEWORK&ALGORITHMS
layerneuralnetworksthroughdeeplearning,basedon
word usage w.r.t contextual, syntactic and semantic
2.1 Notation
information [17, 21]. Intrigued by the popularity of
Letusformallydefineourmethodswiththefollowingno- DWEinrecentresearchinNaturalLanguageProcess-
tation. ing and other domains [6, 5], we explored its appli-
cation to our graph-based inference problem. Specif-
• n is the number of courses in a training set;
ically, we deploy DWE trained on Wikipedia articles
by Rami et al. [1], in a domain which is semantically
• pisthedimensionoftheuniversalconceptspace(Sec-
close to that of academic courses.
tion 2.2;
• x ∈ Rp for i = 1,2,...,n are the bag-of-concepts 4. Category-basedRepresentation(Cat): Thismethod
i
representation of a course in the training set; usedalargesubsetofWikipediacategoriesasthecon-
ceptspace. Weselectedthesubsetviaapoolingstrat-
• X is an n-by-p matrix where each row is x(cid:62) i ; egy as follows: We used the words in our training-set
courses to form 3509 queries (one query per course),
• Y isann-by-nmatrixwhereeachcellisthebinaryin-
and retrieved the top 100 documents per query based
dicatoroftheprerequisiterelationbetweentwocourses,
on cosine similarity. We then took the union of the
i.e., y = 1 means that course j is a prerequisite of
ij Wikipediacategorylabelsoftheseretrieveddocuments,
course i, and y =−1 otherwise.
ij and removed the categories which were retrieved by
• A is a p-by-p matrix, whose elements are the weights onlythreequeriesorless. Thisprocessresultedinato-
of directed links among concepts. That is, A is the talof10,051categoriesintheconceptspace. Thecat-
matrixofmodelparameterswewanttooptimizegiven egorization of courses was based on the earlier highly
the training data in X and Y. scalable very-large category space work reported in
[10]: the classifiers were trained on labeled Wikipedia
2.2 RepresentationSchemes
articlesandthenappliedtotheword-basedvectorrep-
Whatisthebestwaytorepresentthecontentsofcourses resentation of each course for (weighted) category as-
to learn the universal concept space? We explore different signments.
answers with four alternate choices as follows:
Eachoftheaboverepresentationschemesmayhaveitsown
1. Word-based Representation (Word): Thismethod strengths and weaknesses. Word is simple and natural but
uses the vocabulary of course descriptions plus any rathernoisy,becausesemanticallyequivalentlexicalvariants
listedkeywordsbythecourseproviders(MIT,Caltech, are not unified into canonical concepts and there could be
CMU and Princeton) as the entire concept (feature) systematic vocabulary variation across universities. Also,
space. We applied standard procedures for text pre- this scheme will not work in cross-language settings, e.g.,
processing,includingstop-wordremoval,term-frequency if courses descriptions are in English and Chinese. Cat
(TF)basedtermweighting,andtheremovaloftherare would be less noisy and better in cross-language settings,
--- PAGE 4 ---
but the automated classification step will unavoidably in-
troduce errors in category assignments. SCW (sparse cod-
ing of words) reduces the total number of model parame-
tersviadimensionalityreduction,whichmayleadtorobust
training(avoidingoverfitting)andefficientcomputation,but
at the risk of losing useful information in the projection
from the original high-dimensional space to a lower dimen-
sional space. DWE (distributed word embedding) deploys
recent advances in deep learning of word meanings in con-
text. However, reliable word embedding require the avail-
abilityoflargevolumesoftrainingtext(e.g.,Wikipediaar-
ticles);thepotentialmismatchbetweenthetrainingdomain
(for which large volumes of data can be obtained easily)
and the test domain (for which large volumes of data are
hard or costly to obtain) could be a serious issue. Yet an-
otherdistinctionamongtheserepresentationschemesisthat
WordandCatproducehuman-understandableconceptsand Figure 2: The weighted connections from course i
links, while SCW and DWE produce latent factors which to course j via matrix A which encodes the directed
are harder to interpret by humans. links between concepts
By exploring all the four representation schemes in our
unified framework for two-level graph based inference, and
byexaminingtheireffectivenessinthetaskoflinkprediction formula 2 is the empirical loss; the 2nd term is the regular-
of prerequisite relations among courses, we aim to obtain a izationterm,controllingthemodelcomplexitybasedonthe
deeper understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of large margin principle. We choose to use the squared hinge
those representational choices. loss (1−v)2 + the first term to gain first-order continuity of
ourobjectivefunction,enablingefficientcomputationusing
2.3 TheOptimizationMethods accelerated gradient descent [22, 23]. This efficiency im-
provementiscrucialbecauseweoperateonpairsofcourses,
We define the problem of concept graph learning as a
and thus have a much larger space than in normal classifi-
key part of learning-to-predict prerequisite relations among
cation (e.g. classifying individual courses).
courses, i.e., for the two-layer statistical inference we intro-
duced in Section 1 with Figure 1. Given a training set of
2.3.2 TheLearning-to-RankApproach(CGL.Rank)
courses with a bag-of-concepts representation per course as
Inspired by the learning-to-rank literature [12], we ex-
arowinmatrixX,andalistofknownprerequisitelinksper
plored going beyond the binary classifier in the previous
course as a row in matrix Y, we optimize matrix A whose
approach to one that essentially learns to rank prerequisite
elements specify both the direction (sign) and the strength
preferences. Let Ω be the set of course pairs with the true
(magnitudes) of each link between concepts. We propose i
labels y = 1 for different j’s, and Ω¯ the pairs of courses
two new approaches to this problem: a classification ap- ij i
with the true labels y =−1 for different k’s, we want our
proach and a learning-to-rank approach. Both approaches ij
system to give all the pairs in Ω higher score than that of
deploy the same extended versions of SVMalgorithms with i
anypairinΩ¯ . Wecallthisthepartial-orderpreferenceover
squaredhingeloss,buttheobjectivefunctionsforoptimiza- i
links conditioned on course i. Let T be the union of tuple
tion are different. We also propose a nearest-neighbor ap-
sets {(i,j,k)|(i,j) ∈ Ω ,(i,k) ∈ Ω¯ } for all i in 1,2,...,n.
proachforcomparison,whichpredictsthecourse-levellinks i i
We formulate our optimization problem as:
(prerequisites) without learning the concept-level links.
2.3.1 TheClassificationApproach(CGL.Class) min (cid:88) (cid:16) 1− (cid:16) x(cid:62)Ax −x(cid:62)Ax (cid:17)(cid:17)2 + λ (cid:107)A(cid:107)2
In this method, we predict the score of the prerequisite A i j i k + 2 F
link from course i to course j as: (i,j,k)∈T
Or equivalently, we can rewrite the objective as:
yˆ =f (x ,x )=x(cid:62)Ax (1)
ij A i j i j
TheintuitionbehindthisformulaisshowninFigure2. It min (cid:88) (cid:18) 1− (cid:18)(cid:16) XAX(cid:62) (cid:17) − (cid:16) XAX(cid:62) (cid:17) (cid:19)(cid:19)2 + λ (cid:107)A(cid:107)2
can be easily verified that the quantity x(cid:62) i Ax j is the sum- A (i,j,k)∈T ij ik + 2 F
mationoftheweightsofallthepathsfromnodeitonodej
Solvingthisoptimizationproblemrequiresustoextendstan-
inthisgraph,whereeachpathisweightedusingtheproduct
dard packages of SVM algorithms in order to improve com-
of the corresponding x ik , A kk(cid:48) and x jk(cid:48).
putational efficiency because the number of model parame-
ThecriterionforoptimizingmatrixAgiventrainingdata
ters(p2)inourformulationisverylarge. Forexample,with
x for i = 1,2,...,n and true labels y for all course pairs
i ij
thevocabularysizeof15,396wordsintheMITdataset,the
is defined as:
number of model parameters is over 237 million. When p
min (cid:88)(cid:16) 1−y (cid:16) x(cid:62)Ax (cid:17)(cid:17)2 + λ (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 (2) (thenumberofconcepts)ismuchlargerthann(thenumber
A ij i j + 2 F ofcourses),onemayconsidersolvingthisoptimizationprob-
i,j
leminthedualspaceinsteadintheprimalspace. However,
where (1−v) =max(0,1−v) denotes the hinge function, eveninthedualspace,thenumberofvariablesisstillO(n3),
+
and (cid:107)·(cid:107) is the matrix Frobenius norm. The 1st term in corresponding to all the tuples of i,j,k ∈{1,2,...,n}, and
F
--- PAGE 5 ---
the kernel matrix is on the order of of O(n6). We address and (3) can be rewritten as an optimization w.r.t B which
these computational challenges in Section 2.4. only involves O
(cid:0) n2(cid:1)
variables:
2.3.3 TheNearest-NeighborApproach(kNN) min (cid:88) (cid:96) (cid:16) Yˆ −Yˆ (cid:17) + λ tr (cid:16) YˆB(cid:62) (cid:17) s.t. Yˆ =KBK
Different from the two approaches above where matrix A B∈Rn×n ij ik 2
(i,j,k)∈T
plays a central role, as a different baseline, we propose to (6)
predict the prerequisite relationship for any pair of courses The substantially reduced number of parameters in (6) al-
based on matrix X and Y but not A. Let (u,v) be a new lowsustoefficientlycomputethegradientevenforextremely
pairofcoursesinthetestset,andx u andx v bethebag-of- large p2 (by reducing the per-iteration cost). Moreover, the
concept representations of u and v, respectively. We score smoothness of our objective function enables us to deploy
each pair (i,j) in the training set as: Nestrerov’sacceleratedgradientdescent[22,23],ensuringa
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) convergence rate in the order of t−2 where t is the number
yˆ = x(cid:62)x × x(cid:62)x ∀i,j =1,2,...,n
ij u i v j of steps, i.e., the reduced number of iterations.
Bytakingthetoppairsinthetrainingsetandbyassigning 2.5 AlgorithmImplementation
the corresponding y to the new pairs, we perform the k-
i,j The gradient for (6) w.r.t B is given by
nearest neighbor computation. If we normalize the vectors,
the dot-products in the above formula become the cosine  
similarity. This approach requires nearest-neighbor search −2K (cid:88) e
i
(e
j
−e
k
)(cid:62)δ ijkK+λYˆ
on-demand;whenthenumberofcoursepairsinthetestset
(i,j,k)∈T:δijk>0
is large, the online computation would be substantial.
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Via cross validation, we found that k = 1 (1NN) works hereδ =1− Yˆ −Yˆ ,Yˆ =KBK ande ,e ,e areall
ijk ij ik i j k
best for this problem on the current data sets.
unitvectors. Thedetailedimplementationoftheaccelerated
2.4 ScalableAlgorithms gradient descent is summarized in Alg. 1.
AswehavepointedoutinSection2.3.2,thep2 modelpa-
Algorithm 1 Concept Graph Learning
rameters in matrix A and the n3 constraints make the op-
1: procedure CGL.Rank(X,T,λ,η)
timization of CGL.Rank computationally challenging. No
2: K ←XX(cid:62)
standard optimization packages can be applied for large p
3: t←1,B ←0,Q←0
and n. We address this problem by reformulating the ob-
4: while not converge do
jective in a way that the true number of model parameters
reduces to O(n2). 5: ∆←0
6: Yˆ ←KBK
Recall that our original objective (Section 2.3.2) is:
7: for (i,j,k) in T do
A∈ m R i p n ×p (cid:88) (cid:96) (cid:16) Yˆ ij −Yˆ ik (cid:17) + λ 2 (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 F s.t. Yˆ =XAX(cid:62) 8: δ ijk ←1− (cid:16) Yˆ ij −Yˆ ik (cid:17)
(i,j,k)∈T 9: if δ ijk >0 then
(3) 10: ∆ ←∆ +δ
ij ij ijk
where Yˆ is n-by-n, the matrix of the predicted course-level 11: ∆ ←∆ −δ
ik (cid:16) ik ijk (cid:17)
links. Aisap-by-pmatrixoftheinducedconcept-levellinks 12: P ←B−η λYˆ −2K∆K
(weighted). (cid:96)(v)=(1−v)2 isthesquaredhingeloss. Denote
theoptimalsolutionof(3 + )byA∗,wearegoingtoshowthat 13: B ←P + t t − +2 1(P −Q)
this solution can always be written as A∗ = X(cid:62)BX some 14: Q←P
15: t←t+1
n-by-n (n(cid:28)p) matrix B.
WearguethatA∗mustbeidenticaltotheoptimalsolution 16: A←X(cid:62)BX
17: return Yˆ,A
of the following problem:
min (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 s.t. XAX(cid:62) =XA∗X(cid:62) :=Yˆ∗ (4)
F
A∈Rp×p
3. EXPERIMENTS
Otherwise, the solution for (4) will lead to the same loss
as A∗ in (3) but a smaller regularization penalty, which is
3.1 DataandMetrics
contradictory to our assumption that A∗ is the optimal so-
lution for (3). Notice that (4) is just the matrix version of Wecollectedcourselistings,includingcoursedescriptions
the minimum norm problem for an underdetermined linear andavailablepre-requisitestructurefromMIT,Caltech,CMU
system (because p2 >n2), which has a closed-form solution and Princeton1. The first two were complete course cata-
[2, 3, 8] as below: logs,andthelattertworequiredspideringandscraping,and
hencewecollectedonlyComputerScienceandStatisticsfor
A∗ =X(cid:62)K−1Yˆ∗K−1X (5)
CMU, and Mathematics for Princeton. This implies that
where K = XX(cid:62). By defining B := K−1Yˆ∗K−1, we have we can test within-university prerequisite discovery for all
Yˆ∗ =KBK and A∗ =X(cid:62)BX. Hence the regularization in four—thoughMITandCaltechwillbemostcomprehensive—
andcrossuniversityonlypairswherethetraininguniversity
(3) becomes
contains the disciplines in the test university.
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:107)A(cid:107)2 =tr AA(cid:62) =tr X(cid:62)BXX(cid:62)B(cid:62)X Table 1 summarizes the datasets statistics.
F
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) 1The datasets are available at
=tr XX(cid:62)BXX(cid:62)B(cid:62) =tr YˆB(cid:62) http://nyc.lti.cs.cmu.edu/teacher/dataset/
--- PAGE 6 ---
Table 1: Datasets Statistics Table 3: CGL.Rank with four representations
University # Courses # Prerequisites # Words Concept Data AUC MAP
MIT 2322 1173 15396 Word MIT 0.96 0.46
Caltech 1048 761 5617 Cat. MIT 0.93 0.36
CMU 83 150 1955 SCW MIT 0.93 0.33
Princeton 56 90 454 DWE MIT 0.83 0.09
Word Caltech 0.95 0.33
Cat. Caltech 0.93 0.32
Table 2: Results of within-university prerequisite SCW Caltech 0.91 0.22
prediction
DWE Caltech 0.76 0.12
Algorithm Data AUC MAP
Word CMU 0.79 0.55
CGL.Rank MIT 0.96 0.46
Cat. CMU 0.77 0.55
CGL.Class MIT 0.86 0.34
SCW CMU 0.73 0.43
1NN MIT 0.76 0.30
DWE CMU 0.67 0.35
CGL.Rank Caltech 0.95 0.33
Word Princeton 0.92 0.69
CGL.Class Caltech 0.86 0.27
Cat. Princeton 0.84 0.68
1NN Caltech 0.60 0.16
SCW Princeton 0.82 0.60
CGL.Rank CMU 0.79 0.55
DWE Princeton 0.77 0.50
CGL.Class CMU 0.70 0.38
1NN CMU 0.75 0.43
CGL.Rank Princeton 0.92 0.69 ber of other courses as prerequisites. Back to our original
CGL.Class Princeton 0.89 0.61 point, regardless the popularity of AUC in link detection
1NN Princeton 0.82 0.58 evaluations,itslimitationshouldberecognized: therelative
performance among methods is more informative than the
absolute values of AUC.
To evaluate performance, we use the Mean Average Pre- As we can see in Figure 3, the relative ordering of the
cision (MAP)whichhasbeenthepreferredmetricforinin- methods in AUC and MAP are indeed highly correlated
formationretrievalforevaluatingrankedlists,andtheArea acrossallthedatasets. MAPemphasizespositiveinstances
UndertheCurveofROC(ROC/AUCorsimplyAUC)which in the top portion of each ranked list, and hence is more
in popular in link detection evaluations. sensible for measuring the usefulness of the system where
the user interacts with system-recommended prerequisite
3.2 Within-universityPrerequisitePrediction
lists. Comparingtheresultsonallthemethods,weseethat
We tested all the methods on the dataset from each uni- CGL.RankdominatestheothersinbothAUCandMAPon
versity. We used one third of the data for testing, and the most data sets.
remaining two thirds for training and validation. We con-
3.3 EffectsofRepresentationSchemes
ducted5-foldcrossvalidationonthetrainingtwo-thirds,i.e.,
trainedthemodelon80%ofthetraining/validationdataset, Figure4andTable3summarizetheresultsofCGL.Rank
and tuned extra parameters on the remaining 20%. We re- withthefourrepresentationschemes,i.e.,Word,Cat,SCW
peated this process 5 times with a different 80-20% spit in (sparse coding of words) and DWE (distributed word em-
eachrun. Theresultsofthe5runswereaveragedinreport- bedding), respectively. Again the scores of AUC and MAP
ing results. Figure 3 and Table 2 summarize the results of arenotonthesamescale,buttherelativeperformancesug-
CGL.Rank, CGL.Class and 1NN. All the methods used the gest that Word and Cat are competitive with each other
English words as the representation scheme in this first set (or Word is slightly better one some data sets), followed by
of experiments. Notice that the AUC scores for all meth- SCW and then DWE. In the rest of the empirical results
ods are much higher than the MAP scores. The high AUC reportedinthispaper,wefocusmoreontheperformanceof
scores derive in large part from the fact that AUC gives CGL.RankwithWordastherepresentationschemebecause
an equal weight to the system-predicted true positives, re- they perform better, and the space limit does not allow us
gardless of their positions in system-produced ranked lists. to present all the results for every possible permutation of
Ontheotherhand,MAPweighsmoreheavilythetruepos- method, scheme, dataset and metric.
itives in higher positions of ranked lists. In other words,
3.4 Cross-universityPrerequisitePrediction
MAPmeasurestheperformanceofasysteminahardertask:
Not only the system needs to find the true positives (along In this set of experiments, we fixed the same test sets
withfalsepositives),italsoneedstorankthemhigherthan which were used in within-university evaluations, but we
false positives as possible in order to obtain a high MAP alter the training sets across universities, yielding trans-
score. Usingamoreconcreteexample,atotallyuselesssys- fer learning results where the models were trained with the
temwhichmakespositiveornegativepredictionsatrandom datafromadifferentuniversitythanthosewheretheywere
with 50% of the chances will have an AUC score of 50%. tested. By fixing the test sets in both within- and cross-
But this system will have an extremely low score in MAP universityevaluationswecancomparetheresultsonacom-
because the change for a true positive to randomly appear monbasis. ThecompetitiveperformanceofCatincompar-
in the top of a ranked list will be low when true negatives ison with Word is encouraging, given that Wikipedia cate-
dominate in the domain. Our data sets are from such a gories are defined as general knowledge, and the classifiers
domainbecauseeachcourseonlyrequiresaverysmallnum- (SVM’s) we used for category assignment to courses were