The Semantic Web Rule Language
Expressiveness Extensions — A Survey
Abba Lawan1,3 and Abdur Rakib 2
1 School of Computer Science
The University of Nottingham, Malaysia Campus
khyx3alw@nottingham.edu.my
2 Department of Computer Science and Creative Technologies
The University of the West of England, Bristol, UK
Rakib.Abdur@uwe.ac.uk
3 Crops For the Future (CFF), Malaysia
Abstract. The Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) is a direct ex-
tension of OWL 2 DL with a subset of RuleML, and it is designed to be
the rule language of the Semantic Web. This paper explores the state-
of-the-art of SWRL’s expressiveness extensions proposed over time. As
a motivation, the eﬀectiveness of the SWRL/OWL combination in mod-
eling domain facts is discussed while some of the common expressive
limitations of the combination are also highlighted. The paper then clas-
siﬁes and presents the relevant language extensions of the SWRL and
their added expressive powers to the original SWRL deﬁnition. Further-
more, it provides a comparative analysis of the syntax and semantics
of the proposed extensions. In conclusion, the decidability requirement
and usability of each expressiveness extension are evaluated towards an
eﬃcient inclusion into the OWL ontologies.
Keywords: Semantic Web, OWL, Description Logic, Decidability, SWRL Built-
ins, Semantics
1 Introduction
The OWL/SWRL combination oﬀers a more ﬂexible ontology language for mod-
eling knowledge domains with higher degree of expressiveness than using OWL
alone. However, despite the high expressive powers added by SWRL, the combi-
nation does not guarantee a comprehensive ontology modeling language. SWRL
is found to be lacking descriptive constructs to model complex real-life scenar-
ios as required by the Semantic Web. This has led to the evolution of various
expressiveness extensions to the classical SWRL formalism, ranging from simple
mathematical built-ins to extensions that facilitate modeling of vague facts and
predictive knowledge of a given domain.
The semantic web rule language (SWRL) [18] is a W3C recommendation that
extends the Web Ontology Language (OWL)[25] with horn-clause rules. This al-
lows declarative representation of complex domain information that may not be
arXiv:1903.11723v1  [cs.AI]  27 Mar 2019
2 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
possible in OWL alone. OWL being the recommended ontology language for the
semantic web [38], has shown considerable expressive powers over other ontol-
ogy languages, especially its predecessor, the Resource Description Framework
(RDF)4. However, while OWL ontologies provide simple, reusable and easy to
understand domain knowledge models, they lack the declarative expressiveness
oﬀered by rules. As evidently shown in the semantic web architecture (Fig.1),
Rules are projected to support ontologies for eﬃcient domain knowledge rep-
resentation and the semantic web rule language (SWRL) is one of such rules’
languages syntactically closest to OWL. Expressive limitations of the RDFS and
OWL formalisms can thus be augmented by the capabilities of rules designed
for the complex assertion of facts that goes beyond simple declaration of domain
concepts. Moreover, being in common practice with well-established logics, rules
such as SWRL, oﬀers an eﬃcient reasoning support to ontologies with of course
the beneﬁt of added expressiveness.
Fig. 1: The Semantic web language stack[4]
1.1 The SWRL Formalism
SWRL is an expressive rule language designed to enable declarative assertions
using OWL concepts. It is fashioned as the union of Horn logic (HL) and Descrip-
tion logic (DL) in order to achieve higher domain expressiveness and reasoning
capacity than when using OWL alone. In other words, SWRL is a direct exten-
sion of OWL that utilizes its model-theoretic semantics and its syntax basically
stemmed from the combination of DL-based OWL and HL-based Rule-ML. Clas-
sical SWRL rules include positive, function-free horn-clauses written as implica-
tions — consisting of an antecedent (body of the rule), as well as consequent(or
head of the rule). A SWRL-enabled ontology thus contains an OWL Knowledge
base and set of horn-clause rule axioms.
4 https://www.w3.org/RDF/
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 3
SWRL Syntax and Semantics In its human readable form, both SWRL’s rule
body (B) and rule head (H) typically consist of a conjunction of atoms, which
can contain a combination of OWL constructs. Such constructs can be either
in the form of OWL-DL class descriptions of the form C(x), individual-valued
properties — P(x,y), data-valued properties — Q(x,y), OWL same individuals
— sameAs(x,y), OWL diﬀerent individuals — diﬀerentFrom(x,y), or the spe-
ciﬁc built-in functions — builtIn(r, x, ...) . Where ’x’ and ’y’ are either variables
representing OWL classes, properties, and individual data values (in which case
preceded by a ’?’) or OWL individuals themselves.
Note: ’r’ is any SWRL built-in function — bound to a dataLiteral, such as:
swrlb:greaterThan(), swrlb:Multiply() etc.
atom B1∧atomB2...∧atomBn−→atomH1∧atomH2...∧atomHn (1).
The semantics ensures that the condition in the rule’s head be evaluated to
true whenever the conditions in the body are satisﬁed. However, there are vari-
ants to the basic format above such as rules with disjunctions in their heads or
those extended to handle classical negations, etc. The aim of this paper is to re-
view such various expressiveness extensions attributed to the SWRL formalism.
Decidability of SWRL Rules Even though SWRL oﬀers an unrestricted op-
portunity of combining ontologies and declarative assertion of rules, it however,
does so at the expense of decidability. As clearly pointed out in [2], ”there is un-
doubtedly no inference engine that can draw exactly the same conclusion as the
SWRL semantics”. This is due to the highly expressive nature of the formalism
and SWRL being in ﬁrst-order horn clause is unlike its complement OWL-DL,
undecidable. Therefore, for SWRL ontologies to be decidable, a restriction needs
to be placed on the rule axioms. To achieve decidability, SWRL rules are made
to conform to DL-Safety, which is a name for a restriction imposed on the rule
axioms such that they contain only known concepts [35]. In essence, variables in
DL-safe SWRL atoms must be bound only to those concepts or individuals that
are known to exist in the ontology. DL-based reasoners (such as Pellet, HermiT
and Fact++, etc) are needed to reason over SWRL rules.
While the DL-safety may result in an incomplete expression of facts in a
given ontology (due to the limits imposed on the language), inferences from DL-
safe rules are always formally sound. However, as is the case with other logic
programs, such eﬀorts to keep the SWRL formalism within decidable language
constructs and computationally feasible inferences, have resulted in considerable
limitations to the ontology rule language. This is evidently discussed in section
1.3, and thus leading to various expressiveness extensions of SWRL proposed
over time. In what follows, we brieﬂy compare the A-Box and T-Box decidability
requirements followed by highlights in section 1.2 on the strategic importance of
SWRL in OWL ontologies — a reasonable justiﬁcation for our study. For brevity,
reasoning paradigm in SWRL is not discussed here and we refer the interested
reader to [27].
4 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
T-Box versus A-BOX Decidability: Depending on the inference-subject involved,
the DL-safety can be interpreted in terms of the T-Box (Concepts or Terminol-
ogy Box) or the A-Box (Individuals or Facts Assertion Box) of a given ontology.
In terms of the T-Box, DL-Safety imposes a limitation that only those classes
or terms previously deﬁned in the ontology can be used in the SWRL rules —
meaning that no new or unknown individual may be added to the terminol-
ogy box. Whereas in relation to the A-Box, the DL-Safety can be interpreted
thus: variables used in the consequent of a rule must have also appeared in its
antecedent — which implies that no anonymous or loosed individuals can be
introduced into the ontology’s A-Box.
Understanding these limitations can thus make it easier to design new SWRL
extensions that stay within the decidable fragment of the DL, thereby allowing
the inference engines or Reasoners to complete inferences within a ﬁnite time.
Where such design cannot be easily achieved, a syntactic limitation or manual
restriction were usually imposed on the use of the new extensions as discussed
in details in section 3.
1.2 Why SWRL?
Rules generally allow eﬃcient declarative assertions in domain knowledge model-
ing. However, the semantic web rule language (SWRL) is particularly important
in the semantic web knowledge modeling as it allows both the assertion of facts
in OWL ontologies as well as their retrieval. Information retrieval is achieved
through its slightly modiﬁed Semantic Web Query language(SQWRL), which is
an SQL-extended version of SWRL for querying OWL ontologies [29]. The ﬂex-
ibility for users to deﬁne application-speciﬁc methods (user-deﬁned built-ins) as
extension to the SWRL formalism is an important feature that makes SWRL
formalism indispensable where domain modeling using OWL is considered. Re-
garding the added expressiveness of SWRL to the OWL language, the authors
of [16] summarize some of the basic advantages of SWRL as follows:
i. The ability to use class names or their descriptions as predicates.
ii. The use of equalities and inequalities, and
iii. Allowing conjunctions of atoms in both SWRL’s antecedent and consequent.
These syntactic advances, coupled with the numerous expressiveness advan-
tages of logic programming rules, enables SWRL to achieve complex representa-
tion of domain knowledge — making the formalism indispensable in the Semantic
Web project. Further reasons for our focus on the SWRL formalism include the
facts that:
iv. SWRL Rules can be used in transferring characteristics from one class or
property to another without sub-classing — which goes beyond the expres-
sive powers of OWL. A commonly cited example of this transferring prop-
erty is the composite property assertion, popularly referred to as ’the uncle
relationship’.
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 5
v. SWRL rules allow inference of new individuals using existential operators
(e.g. swrlx: makeOWLThing), some of which are deﬁned as built-ins in the
formalism (see section 2.6). While the built-in semantics is yet to be formally
deﬁned as a SWRL speciﬁcation, the ability of SWRL to achieve existential
quantiﬁcation as well as its syntax extensions through user-deﬁned built-ins,
goes beyond the expressive powers of OWL and the classical horn clause rule
formalisms.
vi. Lastly, SWRL being a semantic extension of OWL have enjoyed considerable
experts’ commitment and engaging support from the Semantic Web research
community.
Consequently, the compatibility of the SWRL formalism with OWL and also the
RuleML, makes it easier and sometimes even compelling, for researchers inter-
ested in semantic web rules to equally extend SWRL’s capabilities whenever the
corresponding OWL language is augmented with additional syntax and seman-
tics. A similar view was upheld in [6], where the authors aﬃrms that the added
expressiveness of OWL to cover negative property assertions inspired them to
consider a corresponding SWRL extension. SWRL’s negation extensions were
ﬁrst described and analyzed in [33].
1.3 Limitations of SWRL
Despite the above discussed expressive powers obtained from SWRL, the com-
bination (of OWL and SWRL) still does not guarantee an all-inclusive domain
modeling language. Classical SWRL formalism cannot appropriately represent
various real-world scenarios. For example, expert opinions, which forms a con-
siderable part of every domain knowledge, are typically in the form of imprecise
facts. Thus requiring formalisms that are capable of representing domain facts
based on some degree of certainty or partial truth. Likewise, in legacy software
models, much of formalized domain facts, such as business rules may only hold
where other fragments of existing knowledge remain valid. Therefore, accurate
representation of such scenarios requires knowledge exclusion, prioritization of
facts, as well as knowledge retraction, among others. These forms of knowledge
modeling scenarios are crucial to the eﬀectiveness of expert systems and their
related applications. With common examples found in information fusion, mul-
timedia information processing, automated ontology merging and alignment,
among others. In the remainder of this subsection, however, we highlight some
of the commonly cited limitations of the classical SWRL formalism as follows:
i. Limitation in modeling imprecise domain knowledge. The evolutionary and
sometimes inconsistent nature of human knowledge necessitates represent-
ing vague or imprecise domain information. Hence, the inability of SWRL to
represent inherently vague domain knowledge and business uncertainties is
therefore, a huge setback in modeling real-world scenarios on the semantic
web. This has led to the various fuzzy and probabilistic extensions of the
semantic web rule language.
6 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
ii. Lack of Non-monotonic constructs. Rule-based modeling of a knowledge
domain involves expressing domain facts or situations of domain objects,
through the use of ’if-then’ statements. This ordered representation of fact,
basically reﬂects the ordered nature of the human knowledge — which typ-
ically includes ordering or setting a precedence of activities, leading to the
addition of new facts to existing knowledge bases. The inability of SWRL
to comprehensively model non-monotonic facts such as existentials, quanti-
ﬁers, rule exclusion, and prioritization, etc., were also considered as weighty
limitations that cannot be otherwise ignored. Moreover, it has been shown
that deductive forms of inference, where new facts get inferred from the ab-
sence of other facts, cannot be represented by the SWRL formalism [11].
iii. Removal of Facts. Further examples of realistic scenarios encountered in-
clude the need for ’unlearning’ facts in knowledge bases, i.e. removal of
facts. Constructs needed to model and achieve such scenarios were found to
be lacking in the classical SWRL deﬁnition.
iv. Lack of Support for Modeling Complex Scientiﬁc Knowledge. Other limita-
tions include the SWRL’s inability to eﬃciently model scientiﬁc and engi-
neering knowledge domains, especially those involving complex mathemat-
ical formulas and constraints [19]. The lack of precise constructs to handle
complex engineering formulas usually leads to the development of volumi-
nous set of rules to explain few facts.
1.4 Motivation and Scope
The limitations of OWL and SWRL formalism to provide some of the needed
constructs to model complex scenarios are a hindrance in achieving accurate
representation of domain knowledge on the semantic web. The aim of this work,
therefore, is partly to explore the existing approaches proposed to eliminate these
limitations. We evaluate the various expressiveness extensions to the SWRL for-
malism. To the best of our knowledge, there is no existing work that reviews the
diﬀerent SWRL expressiveness extensions. We consider that the work presented
in this paper can help early researchers and developers in the ﬁeld of seman-
tic technologies to identify the versatility as well as scope of the SWRL/OWL
combination. Moreover, the expressiveness extensions discussed can serve as a
guide for future enhancement and standardization of SWRL, OWL, and their
related formalisms. We limit our explorative review of the available literature to
published (though not necessarily peer-reviewed) works on SWRL expressive-
ness extensions. While some of these proposals are largely theoretical, there are
exceptional cases where the proposed extensions were supported with justiﬁable
implementations. Our comparison of these extensions is largely analytical with
little eﬀorts to verify all the implementation details for the extensions. Moreover,
as the review is intended to serve as a quick comparison guide to the SWRL ex-
pressiveness extensions, the discussions do not cover all aspects presented in
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 7
the original research works. Our focus is mainly on their added syntax and se-
mantics, implementation eﬃciency, followed by brief notes on their decidability
requirements.
In the remainder of the paper, we set the stage in the next subsection with
the Preliminaries, highlighting the basic terminologies and their interpretations
within the context of this research. Essence of the paper is presented in Section 2,
where we discuss and summarize the various extensions of the SWRL formalism.
The decidability requirements of the reviewed extensions is expounded in section
3. This is followed by a discussion and summary in Section 4 and lastly, conclude
the paper in Section 5 highlighting some future research works.
1.5 Basic Terms and Interpretations
– Clausal Logic (CL) is a particular kind of First-Order Logic (FOL) — a
powerful formalism used to express relationships between objects in a given
knowledge domain through quantiﬁed variables and predicates. CL provides
the basis for Logic Programming (LP) through its fragment called Horn
Clause Logic (HCL).
– A Horn-Clause is logic program rule containing disjunctions of literals (rule
atoms) with at most one positive literal [15]. A ﬁnite collection of Horn
clauses together with ground facts are referred to as logic programs (LP).
Simply put, LPs are a ﬁnite set of rules and facts.
– Datalogs on the other hand, are function-free horn-clauses, having only vari-
ables and constants as terms.
– Description Logic (DL) [3] is basically a decidable fragment of FOL that
allows modeling of knowledge domains using concepts (classes) the binary
relations between them (called roles or properties), and individual instances
(facts). Being decidable, the DL forms the basis of most domain modeling
(ontology) languages including OWL.
– Decidability: In the context of this work, decidability refers to the ability
of a ’Reasoner’ to achieve inference — checking the consistency of logical
consequences of ontology axioms and return true or otherwise, within a ﬁnite
time. That is, given any Ontology, a set of rules, and a sentence, the Reasoner
can check that the sentence is entailed by the ontology and rules. More
importantly, there exists a terminating procedure.
– OWL-DL is a decidable fragment of the Web Ontology Language (OWL).
OWL being the most expressive ontology language for the Semantic Web,
as recommended by the W3C [25], evolves overtime as improvement from
other languages such as the RDF, FRAMES, DAML and OIL ontology
languages (see Fig. 2: OWL Evolution and Contextual Relationship with
SWRL). Other fragments of OWL are the OWL-Full which subsumes the
OWL-DL in terms of expressivity and the OWL-Lite, which is the least
expressive fragment. To achieve reasoning over OWL ontologies, a subset
of OWL-Full that completely conforms to the DL framework is extracted as
8 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
the OWL-DL. Generally, OWL ontologies are restricted to the DL expressiv-
ity degree in order to achieve decidability and a complete OWL-DL ontology
can have the expressive equivalence ofSHOIN (D) in the DL expressiveness
metric.
– The DL Expressiveness Metric: In DL-based languages, factual knowledge
during terminology deﬁnitions and individual assertions are usually stored
as formulas in First Order Logic (FOL). However, restrictions are usually at-
tached to these formulas to ensure the decidability and for eﬃcient reasoning
over the ontology they represent [37]. These restrictions also specify a degree
of expressiveness of DL language as compared to the FOL, which is highly
expressive — though undecidable. Basic DL restrictions are represented by
letter-symbol keys e.g. (ALC,SHIQ,SHOIN (D),) etc, to denote a given
expressive power of a modeling language, as described below:
• S—An abbreviation of an Attributive Language with Complement (ALC)
extended with transitive roles.
• ALC— this is obtained when AL is extended with the atomic con-
cept negation such as for example, the Top concept ( ⊤≡ C⊔¬C) and
Floor concept (⊥≡ C∩¬C), where C is an atomic concept. In owl, the
Top concept is called ’Thing’ owl:Thing and all classes are subclasses of
owl:Thing, while the ﬂoor concept is considered as ’Nothing’.
• AL— Attributive Language: is the basic DL language that allows the use
of Concept intersection (∩), universal restrictions (∀), limited existential
quantiﬁcation (∃) and atomic negations of concepts ( ¬), which do not
appear on the left-hand-side of axioms.
• H—An abbreviation of ALC extended with the role hierarchy (owl:
subPropertyOf relationship).
• O— An abbreviation of ALC extended with Nominals (enumerated
classes e.g. owl:oneOf or object value restrictions such as owl:hasValue
relationship).
• I— An abbreviation of ALC extended with Inverse roles or proper-
ties, which allow expressing relationships in opposite directions (e.g.
owl:hasPart and owl:isPartOf).
• N— An abbreviation of ALC extended with a Number or cardinality
restriction. Semantics:≥ n R.C or≤ n R.C
• D—The data values expressivity (D), which is sometimes attached to
the algorithm as subscript, denotes the abilities of DL and its family
of languages to use data values, datatype, and datatype properties to
further express domain facts.
– The OWL 2 Proﬁle: The Web Ontology Language version 2 (OWL 2) is
the formally recommended ontology language for Semantic Web modeling
and much like its predecessor OWL 1, it allows logical domain modeling
by deﬁning classes, individuals, their properties and relationships with each
other or data values, with the addition that OWL 2 ontologies are exclusively
stored as Semantic Web documents. Speciﬁcally, the current version OWL
2 is able to provide a wider range of constructs for expressing concepts such
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 9
Fig. 2: OWL Evolution and Contextual Relationship with SWRL
as transitive and inverse properties, cardinality restrictions, as well as
inheritance, among others. By targeting speciﬁc modeling needs of the web,
it is thence divided into three sub proﬁles, viz. the ’OWL 2 Expressive Lan-
guage’ (OWL2EL), ’OWL 2 Query Language’ (OWL2QL), and the ’OWL
2 Rules Language’ (OWL2RL) [28, 5]. These sub-languages oﬀer diﬀerent
expressiveness and computational desirability.
In essence, the web ontology language (OWL-DL) gives a very expressive and
decidable ontology language and since OWL-DL utilizes the extensive research
on DL, it serves as the foundation for the current language proﬁles of OWL 2.
Fig. 2 below summarizes the contextual relationship between the OWL proﬁles
and SWRL.
2 The SWRL Expressiveness Extensions
SWRL extensions are originally deﬁned in [17] as bindings that provide a map-
ping between variables used in the SWRL rules to objects of a given domain.
As previously mentioned much of SWRL’s extensions were inspired by their cor-
responding OWL extensions. This is usually achieved by modifying the OWL’s
abstract syntax and semantics to adapt to the SWRL canonic mode. This leads
to various proposals that are beneﬁcial to the advancement of both the OWL and
SWRL languages. The remainder of this section highlights some of the expres-
10 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
siveness extensions designed to address the commonly encountered limitations
of the classical SWRL.
2.1 Fuzzy and Probabilistic Extensions — Dealing with
Uncertainties and Imprecise Knowledge
Knowledge from domain experts is usually not without doubts and imperfections.
This imperfect nature of real-world information processing necessitates the long-
started eﬀorts by the AI community to deal with vague knowledge representation.
Notable early eﬀorts in the ﬁeld of classical domain modeling have attempted
to improve the expressivity of Description Logic (DL) to cover uncertainties
through Fuzzy Logic (FL) as discussed in [42] and probabilistic extensions [34],
among others. Likewise, SWRL is found to be inadequate in expressing practical
problems that involve vague or imprecise domain knowledge which is bound
to be common in ontologies or the Semantic Web as a whole. Moreover, even
with the success of semantic web in data provisioning, writing business and
engineering rules using SWRL still remains a challenge. This is due to the fact
that SWRL, much like other Semantic Web languages, stemmed from classical
logics (see Figure 2), which are known to be incapable of modeling vague or
imprecise information.
As highlighted in [30], other scenarios that require modeling of imprecise
facts can be found in multimedia processing, ontology alignment, and infor-
mation fusion, among numerous others. In response, SWRL has since received
signiﬁcant advancements to handle imprecise domain knowledge. One famous
uncertainty reasoning techniques involve the combination of fuzzy logic with
SWRL and another involves extending SWRL formalism with probability theo-
ries. This section reviews some of these advancements and brieﬂy discusses their
individual approaches.
The Fuzzy-SWRL Extension (F-SWRL)
Expressiveness: By imposing fuzzysets theory — precisely, the ’R-implication’
of fuzzy logics [22], new semantics were deﬁned by Horrocks et al. for a fuzzy
extension of SWRL (f-SWRL) [30]. A fuzzy set is deﬁned by its degree of individ-
ual membership (w) called weighted-degree or truth-value and usually computed
from a membership distribution function . The fuzzy membership function does
not only specify whether an element belongs to a given set or otherwise but also
how much. Analogous to fuzzy sets, f-SWRL rules uses a truth value between ’0
and 1’ to express the degree of conﬁdence for individual membership in a given
class or property and also to express weights or importance of each atom in a
SWRL rule.
Syntax and Semantics: Class and property deﬁnitions in f-SWRL have the fol-
lowing form C(x)∗w and P (x,y )∗w, respectively. While a rule in f-SWRL is
of the form:
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 11
Antecedent * wa−→ Consequent * wc. Where w∈ [0, 1].
For example, the following f-SWRL rule (retained from [30]), declares that ”being
healthy is more important than being rich to determine if one is happy”:
Rich(?p)∗ 0.6∧Healthy (?p)∗ 0.8−→Happy(?p)∗ 0.9 (1)
Where Rich, Healthy, and Happy are fuzzy class URI refs, ?p is an individual
valued variable and 0.6, 0.8 and 0.9 are the assigned weights of the corresponding
fuzzy atoms.
In a nutshell, f-SWRL extends SWRL with fuzzy-based class and property def-
initions as well as fuzzy rule axioms. The result is that f-SWRL rules are able
to represent such information that says how much a concept is believed to be
true and which facts are more important than others when making decisions.
Users can, therefore, represent vague domain knowledge with f-SWRL rules by
asserting the degree of conﬁdence or otherwise of a given fact.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: In assigning a predetermined weight on the con-
sequent atom, the f-SWRL extension is shown to be suitable for writing fuzzy
rules with atomic consequents and thereby making rule prioritization. This ab-
solute form of prioritization, however, becomes a problem whenever new rules
are introduced in the KB, as then all the existing weight values may have to
be readjusted. Moreover, the proposal does not present a way of resolving such
conﬂicts. As such, more support is needed for f-SWRL to deal with non-atomic
fuzzy rules, i.e. rules with more than one atom in the consequent. Furthermore,
complete fuzzy-rule declaration needs to be considered in f-SWRL since repre-
senting uncertainties in domain knowledge requires more than just fuzzy class
and property deﬁnitions. Based on our evaluation, much of the f-SWRL pro-
posal is still theoretical as neither implementation eﬀorts nor practical scenarios
were mentioned. Likewise, the fuzziness of the extension has been critically ques-
tioned by the authors of [1], asserting that syntax and semantics proposed in
f-SWRL do not actually solve much of the fuzziﬁcation problem. For an abstract
literature on fuzzysets theory and fuzzy logics, we refer the interested reader to
[22].
The Vague-SWRL Extension Highlighting their argument against f-SWRL’s
inability to provide a substantial fuzzy extension to SWRL, the Vague-SWRL
extension was proposed in [40].
Expressiveness: In this proposal, the authors argues that the use of single-
membership degree on a fuzzy set, such as the single weight function in f-
SWRL extension, is insuﬃcient in representing a vague information. Conse-
quently, based on the theory of Vague sets [14], the authors propose the Vague-
SWRL as another fuzzy extension of SWRL. Vague Sets are themselves an ex-
tension of fuzzy sets, where the degree of membership to a set is evaluated using
two weighted intervals — as opposed to a single degree of membership employed
12 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
in fuzzy sets. As such, Vague-SWRL rules uses an added weight value (w2) called
’a second-degree weight’ denoting further degree of membership to support and
balance an initial weight (w1). By introducing w2, the proposal promises a more
accurate representation of imprecise domain knowledge than a single member-
ship fuzzy class and properties assertions of f-SWRL.
Syntax and Semantics: As presented in [14], the general form of vague-SWRL
is written as:
(vc * fdw) (vcv * sdw) ... ∧ (vp * fdw) (vpv * sdw) ... −→ (vc * w) or (vp * w)
Where: ’vc’ = vague classes, ’fdw’ = ﬁrst-degree weights, ’vcv’ = vague class
values corresponding to ’vc’ and ’sdw’ = second-degree weights. Similarly, ’vp’
= vague properties, ’vpv’ = vague property values and ’w’ = the atomic weights.
The vague values, also called the membership intervals, are calculated as:
vcv/vpv = [tv(x), 1−fv(x)]
And the ’sdw’, also referred to as the ’vagueness’ or second degree of mem-
bership, is calculated as the diﬀerence:
w2 = [(1−fv(x))−tv(x)]
Where: tv (x) is the true membership function of x, fv(x) its false membership
function, and 0≤tv(x) +fv(x)≤ 1
Example Case. Consider the following additional information (membership de-
grees) added to rule (1): ”P is rich with a true value of 0.6 and a false value of
0.3. Also, P is healthy with a true value of 0.3 and a false value of 0.2” .
With this additional info, we can represent the parameters:
vcv(Rich) = [0.6, 0.7] and vpv(isHealthy ) = [0.3, 0.8]
Hence, the vague-SWRL form of rule (1) can then be written thus:
[Rich(?p)∗ 0.6][0.3]∧ [Healthy (?P )∗ 0.8][0.1]
−→Happy(?p)∗ 0.9 (2)
Here, 0.9 is the degree to which the consequent holds following the evaluation
of the antecedent.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: As vague sets subsumes fuzzy sets, vague-SWRL
ultimately subsume its corresponding f-SWRL rule in terms of expressiveness.
By comparing rules 1 and 2, it can be seen that unlike f-SWRL, vague-SWRL is
more than just a conjunction of weighted atoms. The added eﬀort in the form of
vcv and vpv are calculated to represent the uncertainties in the fuzzy member-
ship classes Rich, Healthy, and Happy. Moreover, by specifying the upper and
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 13
lower bounds of membership intervals (through the true and false values), vague-
SWRL rules are more justiﬁably accurate in representing imprecise knowledge
using fuzzy class and properties. Vague-SWRL is also claimed, by the authors, to
be in ”an acceptable form of the Rule Interchange Format (RIF)”. A compara-
ble extension, Vague-RuleML[31], is also proposed for the rule markup language
(Rule ML).
However, similar to f-SWRL, the Vague-SWRL only represents fuzzy infor-
mation for class and property memberships, which may be inadequate in repre-
senting practical uncertainties involved in knowledge domains and the semantic
web. Also, a fair understanding of vague sets and vague knowledge representa-
tion is required to eﬃciently model fuzzy information using vague-SWRL rules.
Hence, there is a need to improve the proposal with richer fuzzy modeling syn-
taxes to handle imprecise domain knowledge beyond the borders of class and
property memberships — the SWRL-F extension below gives a good example.
The SWRL-Fuzzy Extension (SWRL-F) The SWRL-F extension [42] was
proposed as another Fuzzy Logic (FL) extension to the SWRL formalism. How-
ever, unlike f-SWRL and vague-SWRL extensions, which were based on the fuzzy
sets principle, the SWRL-F extension expresses fuzzy reasoning in SWRL rules
using a ’fuzzy control system’ approach.
Expressiveness: In this approach, the main ontology remains intact while a fuzzy
ontology consisting of SWRL-F rule-base is added to model any ambiguous do-
main knowledge using logical variables. The fuzzy ontology is needed to deﬁne
inherent fuzzy domain knowledge using fuzzy: sets, terms, variables and fuzzy
values as entities. These entities were deﬁned as classes with their respective
object and data properties. Modelling a fuzzy fact requires the use of the fuzzy
terms to calculate a fuzzymatch for the respective instances.
Syntax and Semantics: SWRL-F introduces a special object property called
’fuzzymatch’ for each fuzzy set. The fuzzymatch is used when designing SWRL-
F rules to match corresponding Fuzzy-Variables with designated Fuzzy-Values
from each respective fuzzy set. For example, the following SWRL-F rule (adopted
from [42]) can assert the vague facts; ”Persons with good health status are always
very happy” and can be written using SWRL-F rule as:
Person (?p) ∧ hasHealthStatus (?p, ?s)∧
fuzzymatch (?s,goodHealthStatus )∧ isHappy(?p, ?h)
−→fuzzymatch (?h,VeryHappy )
(3)
Here, the fuzzymatch attribute is used in the antecedent of the rule to calcu-
late the degree of membership for the ’HealthStatus’ variable (?s) — as employed
in the fuzzy term ’goodHealthStatus’ denoting the fuzzy set in this instance.
While used in the Consequent, the fuzzymatch variable allows binding the new
value ’VeryHappy’ to the fuzzy value ’isHappy’, giving SWRL a chance to express
the wooly term, ’very happy’.
14 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Implementation and Eﬃciency: In essence, the fuzzy ontology and SWRL-F
rules are only added where necessary to handle uncertain domain knowledge rep-
resentation. Furthermore, the authors claim that the new rule language, SWRL-
F, is supported with an exclusive publicly-available ontology development envi-
ronment having a test execution engine. However, several attempts at ﬁnding
the link currently present an empty Prot´ eg´ e wiki page. An apparent limitation
to the SWRL-F implementation is that some of the current OWL2 constructs
cannot be utilized in the SWRL-F rules. Moreover, running the SWRL-F rules
requires a modiﬁed version of theSWRLJessTab in Prot´ eg´ e ontology editor — an
implementation requirement that may be diﬃcult to domain experts. Moreover,
using the language to model vague domain knowledge also requires an in-depth
understanding of fuzzy logic and representation scheme.
On the other hand, due to its adoption of a well-established approach — the
fuzzy control system approach, SWRL-F oﬀers a more pragmatic and justiﬁable
approach to fuzzy extension of SWRL as compared to its siblings, f-SWRL and
vague-SWRL. The use of the ’fuzzymatch’ attribute also makes SWRL-F suit-
able for developing semantic web applications with queries that require fuzzy
inferencing from facts separately stored in the main ontology. In addition, since
by design the SWRL-F fuzzy ontology is separated from the domain ontology,
reasoner inferences are thus limited only to the SWRL-F rulebase. This is de-
sirable nonetheless, as the modularity avoids introducing inconsistencies to the
main ontology.
Fuzzy Non-monotonic Extension of SWRL (f-NSWRL) The f-NSWRL
[39], presents yet another fuzzy SWRL extension for dealing with non-monotonicity
as well as uncertainties in domain information using SWRL rules.
Expressiveness: This extension is basically an advancement of the fuzzy-SWRL
extension (section 2.1) to incorporate a non-monotonic knowledge, speciﬁcally
the knowledge negation (called classical negation) and Negation as Failure (NAF),
which involves knowledge modeling based on the absence of positive facts in a
KB. This is also referred to as Closed World Negation (CWN). Citing the impor-
tance of expressing classical negation and the NAF in handling rule exceptions,
the authors asserts the motivations for f-NSWRL extension of SWRL — as a
non-monotonic as well as a fuzzy extension of the SWRL formalism.
Syntax and Semantics: In its simplest form, the f-NSWRL uses the ’Not’ and ’¬’
symbols as operators to extend the original f-SWRL’s fuzzy classes and proper-
ties deﬁnition. As an example, consider the addition of the following information
to modify rule 1 in an attempt to determine if a person is happy; ”Person p is
rich and p is deﬁnitely not hungry but the health status of p is not known” De-
cision rules based on the above statement can be expressed using f-NSWRL as
follows:
Healthy (?p)∗ 0.8∧ (¬Hungry (?p))∗ 0.99
−→Happy(?p)∗ 0.9 (4)
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 15
Healthy (?p)∗ 0.8∧not(Hungry (?p))∗ 0.99
−→Happy(?p)∗ 0.9 (5)
Note the diﬀerence in the use of the two operators as highlighted in the two
equations. While the classical negation (¬) is used to negate the assertion that
Person (?p) is hungry in rule 4 and the NAF used in 5 to test the absence of an
assertion that ’p is hungry’. A quick interpretation of the two rules is that rule
4 simply declares that ’A person must be not hungry and healthy to be happy’.
Whereas rule 5 declares that ’a person is happy if she is healthy and isnot known
to be hungry’.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: Apart from handling negation and uncertainty,
other notable aspects of the f-NSWRL proposal include a proposed markups in
’RuleML’ for translating f-NSWRL to other rule languages and also procedures
to handle rule prioritization — for setting rule precedence in cases of conﬂicting
consequents. However, the proposal failed to mention the semantics of these
extensions nor the inference mechanism for implementing a supporting Reasoner.
We discuss more on speciﬁc Non-monotonic extensions of SWRL in section
2.2 below.
The Bayesian Extension of SWRL (Bayes-SWRL) In order to allow mod-
eling of predictive knowledge and the representation of inherently probabilistic
domain knowledge (such as Statistical information) on the semantic web, various
probabilistic extensions were proposed — to the semantic web languages. These
include among others, the Probabilistic RDF (pRDF) and Probabilistic OWL
(PR-OWL) [8], Bayes-OWL[10] and Bayes-SWRL [24].
Expressiveness: While Fuzzy Logic extensions of SWRL focus on representing
the degree of certainty or otherwise of domain knowledge in SWRL-enabled
ontologies, probabilistic extensions of SWRL such as Bayes-SWRL are more
concerned with representing predictive knowledge based on an existing partial
knowledge in the domain ontology or knowledgebase. Based on the Bayesian
Networks of probability theory [9] and in line with the corresponding Bayesian
OWL extension [10], the Bayes-SWRL extends the SWRL formalism with the
ability to model probabilistic knowledge. This is achieved by combining SWRL
with the expressive capabilities of the Bayesian Logic Programs thereby enabling
probability assertions during inference.
Syntax and Semantics: The Bayes-SWRL extension naturally adopts the origi-
nal SWRL’s abstract syntax and semantics with the addition of few innovative
symbols and patterns to represent the probability variable (the p-variable) and
related terms — such as the Conditional Probability Table (CPT). Similar to
the fuzzy weights (w) assigned to Vague-SWRL rule atoms, the Bayes-SWRL
also use a Probability variable to assign probabilities to rules atoms in both the
16 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
antecedent and/or consequent atoms. The probability value also ranges from [0,
1] and is optionally added to the rule atoms, with its values predeﬁned in a
conditional probability table supplied to the consequent atom in the form of an
XML ﬁle. In its human readable syntax, Probability values of imprecise atoms
are attached with an asterisk (*) to the rule atoms. While the CTP ﬁle path
is attached using the ’@’ symbol (as shown in rule 6 below). In this form, a
Bayes-SWRL that asserts that ”It might rains with a certain probability, if it is
cloudy and humid” can be written as:
Cloudy(?cl) ∗ p(cl) ∧ isHumid(?hm) ∗ p(hm)−→
Rainfall (?r) ∗ p(r)@”RainfallCPTs.xml ” (6)
Where: the p-variables, * p(cl), * p(hm) and *p(r), represents the probability
values for cloudy, humid and rainfall, respectively. Assuming probable rainfall
chances were calculated, for optimal cloudy and humid conditions, in the sup-
plied RainfallCPTs.xml ﬁle. A more detailed description of the abstract syntax
and semantics of Bayes-SWRL can be found in [24].
Implementation and Eﬃciency: The proposal of Bayes-SWRL is equipped with
a reasoning algorithm implemented by extending an existing OWL-DL reasoner
based on the tableaux algorithm, the Pellet reasoner, to interpret the added syn-
tax based on the deﬁned probabilistic semantics. It is also equipped with a user
interface for checking rules conﬂict and viewing the inference process, among
others.
Consider this: The extension is eﬀective as it is able to provide a well-deﬁned
syntax and semantics for modeling uncertainties. However, the extension be-
ing a by-product of BLP and SWRL automatically inherits the constraints of
both formalisms. Hence for Bayes-SWRL rules to be decidable, the DL-safety
restriction must be adhered to by its reasoner. Similarly, the BLP precondi-
tions apply to a Bayes-SWRL rule, such as: ﬁrstly, a consequent atom can only
be inﬂuenced by a ﬁnite number of random variables — thereby adopting the
closed world assumption. While this may not pose any serious threat to domain
modeling, it however, limits the capabilities of Bayes-SWRL to represent NAF.
Secondly, in the inference relation between atoms, there can be no cycle in the
dependency graph. Hence expressing relationships is severely limited. Thirdly, a
probability of any consequent atom can only be inﬂuenced by the probabilities
of corresponding antecedent atoms in the same rule. Meaning that, probabilities
deﬁned in previous rules cannot be reused in new rules. Therefore, contrary to
the non-monotonic nature of the real-world knowledge, especially those found
in the semantic web, this precondition demonstrates a monotonic limitation of
Bayes-SWRL knowledge bases. Moreover, while the conditional probability of a
Bayes-SWRL rule is based on a well-founded semantics, as is the case with pDat-
alogs [34], the declaration of an arbitrary set of probable states for the ground
atoms beforehand, poses some close-world expressive limitation for modeling
continuously evolving knowledge domains.
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 17
2.2 Non-monotonic Extensions — Dealing with Negation and
Removal of Facts, Rules Exclusion and Prioritization
With the proposed extension of the OWL2 proﬁle to handle negative prop-
erty assertions, there is a corresponding eﬀort to also extend SWRL with non-
monotonic operations — notably presented in [33] and [6]. Moreover, since
SWRL formalism basically involves OWL constructs coupled with rule axioms,
any OWL extension inherently results in a new SWRL extension. While non-
monotonic axioms involve constructs that produce knowledge bases conforming
to the Closed World Assumption (CWA), monotonic constructs generally follow
the Open World Assumption (OWA), as required in the Semantic Web envi-
ronment. As such, the semantics of these non-monotonic extensions to SWRL
have to be carefully modeled to keep the new rules decidable. For brevity of
scope, we present here only the non-monotonic extensions added to the SWRL
formalism. For a detailed description of Monotonicity and the applications of
non-monotonic logic in rules, we refer interested readers to [6].
The ’not’ operator — Weak Negation or Negation as Failure (NAF)
Owing to its monotonic background inherited from Description Logics, and the
OWA of ontologies, the original SWRL formalism does not support negation as
failure (NAF)— as that will logically violate the open-world protocol. As such,
both its antecedent and consequent can contain only positive conjunctions of
atoms or facts.
Expressiveness: Hence, the NOT operator (also called weak negation) was intro-
duced to allow for expressing negation of facts. Negation of facts simply means,
modeling the absence of positive, known or existing facts in a knowledgebase.
It should be noted here that whenever a negation of membership is intended, a
strong negation (also called complement) is easily achieved in SWRL using the
owl:complementOf class description.
Syntax and Semantics: Abstract deﬁnition of the not operator is depicted in the
following table:
Example Case. The following Non-monotonic SWRL rule declares that ”A
person that does not have a ’spouse property’ is automatically a member of the
Singles class” :
Person (?p) ∧ Not(hasSpouse(?p, ?s))−→Single(?p) (7)
For the complement operator or Strong Negation (as previously discussed in
f-NSWRL — see section 2.1), using the above example, we can write the rule by
testing the existence of ’P’ in the married class, as follows:
Person (?p) ∧ (notMarried (?p))−→Single(?p) (8)
Where, the ’not’ enclosed in the bracket together with the ’Married’ class name,
denotes the complementOf relationship for the married class.
18 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
SWRL
Elements
Pattern Matching (P) Condition Test
P(x; y)
Q(x; y)
(?x P ?y)
(?x Q ?y)
S(P) = True
not(P(x; y))
not(Q(x; y))
(?z rdf:type owl:Negative-
Property)
(?z rdf:subject ?x)
(?z rdf:predicate [P or Q])
(?z rdf:object ?y)
S(P) = False
Table 1: Syntax of the Weak Negation (NAF) [6]
Implementation and Eﬃciency: However, a special Reasoner is required to run
extensions having the weak negation (NAF) as shown above. On how to express
the semantics of NAF, the ’non-monotonic inference process’ has been high-
lighted in [6]. On the other hand, the classical or strong negation can be easily
achieved in OWL and subsequently in SWRL, using theowl:complementOf class
description, which can also be employed in the SWRL rules — as shown in rule
8.
The Quantiﬁers — Exists, ForAll, and notExists operators The Quan-
tiﬁers were introduced in SWRL rules to handle incomplete facts, when used
in the antecedent (body of the rule) and for removing facts, when used in the
rule’s consequent (head). In this set of expressiveness extensions, two types of
fact quantiﬁcation were introduced here. First, the Existential quantiﬁers — the
Exists (∃) and notExists( ∄) used to assert an existence and otherwise respec-
tively, of at objects in a knowledge base (KB). Secondly, the Universal quantiﬁer
— ForAll (∀), which generalizes some assertion on group of objects in a KB.
We discuss the notExist extension here. While the Exists and ForAll quanti-
ﬁers with their example use cases, will be discussed in section 2.4 as part of the
SWRL existential extensions.
Expressiveness of ’notExist’ Quantiﬁer Due to the diﬀerent semantic interpre-
tations attributed to the antecedent and consequent sides of rule axioms, the
notExist quantiﬁers can be used to achieve diﬀerent assertion of facts (expres-
siveness) depending on which side they are placed in a SWRL rule. These asser-
tions are presented in the following scenarios:
a. notExists Operator in the Antecedent — Checking for missing facts: To han-
dle missing information as facts, the ’notExists’ and ’Exist’ quantiﬁers were
proposed to allow some action to be taken where certain facts are not deﬁned
in the KB. This is useful because due to the OWA of SWRL KBs, it is not
always feasible to write rules that, for example, enumerate or test-out for all
individuals or properties. In such cases, asking for the existence or otherwise
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 19
of a particular individual or property oﬀers a simple solution. For example,
the following rule (9) checks for the absence of participants with spouses in a
booking register and asserts the status of the register.
Participant (?p) ∧ hasBooking(?p, ?b)∧
notExists(hasSpouse(?p, ?s))−→
bookingStatus(?b, ”SinglesOnly ”) (9)
b. notExists Operator in the Consequent — Removal of Knowledge: Conversely,
using the NotExist operator in the consequent of a SWRL rule, results in the
removal of knowledge. For example, rule 9 above may need to be retracted
whenever a married participant made a booking and the ’hasSpouse’ property
get added to the ontology. Instead of deleting the rule manually, a better
option, would be to change the ’bookingStatus’ information using another
rule (10), as follows:
Participant (?p) ∧ hasBooking(?p, ?b)∧
hasSpouse(?p, ?s)−→
notExists(bookingStatus(?b, ”SinglesOnly ”))
∧ bookingStatus(?b, ”Mixed”) (10)
A clearer example is also presented in the mail list update function shown
in rule 11, where the ’notExist’ operator is used to test whether a member of a
workgroup exist in a membership mailing list before adding them to an Alumni
mail list:
Workgroup (?g) ∧ Alumni(?a) ∧ hasMember (?g,
?a)−→notExists(mailListMember (?a, ?g)
∧ AlumniMailList (?a) (11)
Syntax and Semantics of the ’notExist’ Quantiﬁer In continuation of the deﬁ-
nition of the Non-monotonic operators, the Table 2 below shows the notExists
constructs and is used as is, in the human-readable syntax of SWRL. The se-
mantics hold that S(P) becomes universally satisﬁable for any unbound elements
(A, B ... Z) associated to the notExist operator.
SWRL Elements Pattern Matching
(P)
Condition
Test
NotExist (A, B, ... Z) (A), (B), ..., (Z) S(P) = U
Table 2: Syntax of ’notExist’ Extension to SWRL [6]
20 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Implementation and Eﬃciency: As shown in the example rules 9, 10 and 11,
implementation of the notExists operator is simple and usually depends on the
side of the inference operator it appears. A notable eﬃcient use of the operator
is where there are conﬂicting facts in a knowledge base, the use of notExists
operator help in retraction of a rule to restore consistency. As such, the concept
of rule’s ’precedence’ and ’rule retraction’ is strongly advised in the inference
process of [6]. Consequently, this paves the way for our next SWRL extension
— the dominance and mutex operators in the next section.
2.3 Rules Ordering and Priority Extensions
Introduced to deﬁne relationships between rules and their semantics, the ’dom-
inance’ and ’mutex’ constructs are extensions meant to control the behavior of
SWRL rules execution.
Expressiveness: Precisely, the dominance operator is used to specify the order of
rule execution by assigning a precedence of one rule over another. In contrast, the
’mutex’ operator is non-symmetric and designed to assert the complete exclusion
of a rule due to the execution of other rules.
Syntax and Semantics: As deﬁned in [6], the dominance operator is deﬁned as
dominance (Rx, Ry), where Rx and Ry are rule names, and with a semantic
meaning that ”rule Rx has more priority in the execution order than Ry”. Fur-
thermore, the dominance operator is designed to be transitive, thereby suitable
for handling the addition of new rules into a rule base.
As an example, consider the execution of rules 9 and 10 above. We may
want to run the ’Mixed-Status’ rule (rule 10) ﬁrst to check if there are married
participants in the knowledge base before asserting the ’Singles’ booking status
in rule 9. To set this ordering, we can write the dominance operation as follows:
dominance (Rule10, Rule9) (12)
Whereas in its syntactic format, the mutex operator is written thus: Mutex
(Rx, Ry), asserting the fact that ”rule Ry will not be executed in the event that
ruleRx is already executed”. Continuing to the hypothetical example above, we
may want to completely skip executing the ’Singles Only’ rule (9) in the event
that the booking status is explicitly known to be ’Mixed’. This can be achieved
that through thus:
Mutex (Rule10, Rule9) (13)
Implementation and Eﬃciency: However, these extensions requires specially
modiﬁed Reasoners for inference and are yet to be formally accepted as part
of standardized SWRL deﬁnition.
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 21
2.4 Existential Extensions — Dealing with Quantiﬁcation of
Individuals
As explained earlier, owing to DL-Safety restrictions, SWRL-enabled ontologies
can not introduce new individuals (see section 1.1). Moreover, with SWRL being
the combination of OWL-DL and DataLog RuleML — which do not allow exis-
tential quantiﬁcation in its consequent, it becomes even more diﬃcult to assert
new individuals into a classical OWL/SWRL ontology. However, as the authors
of [23] puts out,
”It sometimes becomes necessary during inference and where certain
conditions are met, to introduce new individuals to an ontology”
Addition of new individuals to a knowledge base is commonly referred to as
’existential quantiﬁcation’ and in what follows, we discuss the various SWRL
extensions proposed for achieving that.
The XSWRL Extension
Expressiveness: To achieve existential quantiﬁcation in SWRL, new operators
were deﬁned and the new extension referred to as extended semantic web rule
language (XSWRL) [23]. The direct extension deﬁnes new operators to achieve
the addition of new individuals to existing classes of SWRL ontologies.
Syntax and Semantics: XSWRL uses similar syntax and semantics of the classi-
cal SWRL with the only diﬀerence being that rules in XSWRL use an additional
operator that allows for introducing new individuals. This is achieved through
the use of ’existentially quantiﬁed variables’ in the rule’s consequent — repre-
sented by preﬁxing them with an exclamation mark (!). Universally quantiﬁed
variables are represented with the usual question mark (?), as in the original
SWRL deﬁnition. As an example, consider the rule assertion that ”All members
of a project Workgroup should be Engineers” .
Workgroup (?g)−→Engineer(!e) ∧ hasMember (?g, ?e) (14)
Implementation and Eﬃciency: From the XSWRL’s prototype implementation,
presented in [23], it can be understood that by deﬁning the semantics of ’!’ (the
existential operator) into the SWRL abstract semantics, reasoning over XSWRL
rules can be achieved using existing DL-Reasoners such as Racer and Fact++.
However, it remains to be seen of such implementation and whether the exten-
sion will be practically utilized by the semantic web community. This is because:
contrary to the classical SWRL, XSWRL rules with non-atomic consequents and
having joint existential variables cannot be split into multiple rules with atomic
consequents. This, makes it diﬃcult to assign rule-preference or prioritize rule
execution of XSWRL rules. Recall, that the concept of DL-Safeness ensures de-
cidability in SWRL rules by limiting the consequent variables to only those that
previously occurs in the antecedent. As such, further restrictions must be placed
22 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
on the use of the existential variables declared in XSWRL to ensure decidabil-
ity. To this end, the authors declare the added restriction: ”Do not construct a
rule, which has existentially quantiﬁed variables, to form acyclic chain between
its atoms or with atoms from other rules” . Though this may restrict the expres-
siveness of the XSWRL language, but it ensures that inﬁnite chains are safely
avoided. Hence, XSWRL rules need to be tracked manually to ensure that their
executions will not lead to a cyclic chain of existential quantiﬁcation. However,
this manual restriction, can be overly tedious or impracticable in very large
ontologies.
SWRL First Order Logic Extension (SWRL-FOL)
Expressiveness: In an attempt to extend SWRL towards the expressiveness of
First-Order Logic, notably to achieve the quantiﬁcation of individuals, a SWRL-
FOL extension was proposed in [32]. Analogous to the FOL Rule Markup Lan-
guage 5, the proposal deﬁnes an abstract syntax and semantics for the SWRL-
FOL extension. It shows how SWRL can be extended, to utilize the expressive
powers of FOL, by extending the component OWL axioms to include function-
free FOL assertion axioms.
Syntax and Semantics: SWRL FOL proposal deﬁnes an abstract syntax of the
expressive extensions and further provided the model theoretical semantics for
their interpretations. In their abstract syntax, SWRL-FOL ontologies contain
sets of OWL axioms, facts, and horn-clause rules with additional FOL axioms or
assertions. These assertions however, introduces some extensions to the original
SWRL format, such as the limitless use of ’conjunctions’ and/or ’disjunctions’ in
the FOL formula and the use of constructs such as negation, ’ForAll’, ’Exists’ ,
etc. over unary and binary predicates. However, the semantic interpretations
of these assertions are deﬁned as ’bindings’ which maps every variable to an
element in the domain. See SWRL built-ins extensions in section 2.6 for more
details on predicate bindings.
Example: Consider the Workgroup members assertion in rule 14. An alter-
native expression using the direct Exists element deﬁned in FOL-SWRL can be
written as:
Workgroup (?g)−→∃ mhasMember (?g, ?m) ∧ Engineer(?m) (15)
Implementation and Eﬃciency: What we noted here is that the proposal in [32]
is largely theoretical and as the authors of [23] puts out, its practical implemen-
tation is still open for discussion. This however, is due to the usual concerns
of decidability and the lack of Reasoners that can achieve inferences over the
FOL sentences. Nevertheless, considering its extensive deﬁnition and the general
utilization of FOLs, no doubt the SWRL-FOL extension can help to provide a
good foundational framework for FOL-based SWRL extensions.
5 http://ruleml.org/fol/
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 23
SWRL Constraints Interchange Format (CIF-SWRL): Extending SWRL
to Express Fully Quantiﬁed Constraints
Expressiveness: In their motivation, the authors of CIF-SWRL [26] explains
that knowledge fusion in an open distributed environments such as the semantic
web, involves data gathering from various network sources, which also include
the constraints on how the data can be used. As such, utilizing these constraints
directly using the SWRL rules can help to achieve existential quantiﬁcations.
The Constraint Interchange Format (CIF) extension of SWRL (CIF-SWRL)
is an advancement of the SWRL formalism towards the constraint satisfaction
problem (CSP). While in most cases, the target is simply to improve the SWRL
formalism (rule layer) for better domain modeling, in CIF-SWRL extension, the
objective is to improve SWRL to handle CSPs in the Logic layer of the Semantic
Web and the aim is to allow the quantiﬁcation of these constraints so that new
individuals can be introduced into the knowledge base.
Syntax and Semantics: To allow expressing fully-quantiﬁed constraints using the
CIF-SWRL rules, the proposal aligns the original features of CIF with the SWRL
deﬁnition to form a single modeling language. In essence, the extension intro-
duce constraints — deﬁned as quantiﬁed implications, to solve the problem of
existential quantiﬁcation in the classical SWRL. These constraints are expressed
using an interchange format, such as the First-order logic (FOL)-based CIF, to
form relevant constraint satisfaction problems that serve as inputs to constraint
solver. To illustrate the CIF/SWRL added syntax, we quote the following rule
assertion: ”Every workgroup must contain at least 1 member who is a Professor”
(∀?g∈Workgroup )−→
(∃?p∈Professor )∧hasMember (?g, ?p) (16)
Meaning: For all Workgroup g, there exists a Professor p, who is also a
member of the workgroup. The rule above shows the directly added symbols,
’ForAll (∀) and Exists ( ∃), which are both subsets of a ’Quantiﬁers’ class —
deﬁned in the CIF-SWRL expressiveness extension.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: The CIF-SWRL extension comes about as an
advancement of an existing CSP, which uses OWL ontology as a data model
and SWRL rules for expressing constraints. Beside the use of quantiﬁcation
symbols, CIF/SWRL also claims to introduce nested quantiﬁed implications,
which supposedly allows for multiple-quantiﬁcation of individuals in a rule. The
proposal features the technical details of CIF-SWRL extension, including the
abstract syntax and semantics, with an illustrative application to a use case.
However, the featured implementation does not fully explain a reasoning strategy
for inference on CIF-SWRL rules. Other forms of non-monotonic extensions,
precisely the representation of ’disjunction’ and ’negation’, were also mentioned
as work-in-progress.
24 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Note: Rule (16) can also be expressed simply in DL (OWL) as:
Workgroup ⊒∃hasMember.Professor (17)
The Semantic Web Constraint Language (SWCL) Recognizing the need to im-
prove the CIF/SWRL extension to handle more than just logical constraints,
a complimentary extension of CIF-SWRL called the Semantic Web Constraint
Language (SWCL) was proposed in [21] and subsequently applied in [20]. The ra-
tionale being that by incorporating other constraint satisfaction problems. such
as the mathematical constraints, CIF-SWRL will can extend its applicability to
problem areas beyond simple decision problems. The SWCL is then deﬁned as
an OWL-based extension for modeling mathematical constraints to solve basic
optimization problems in the semantic web. It includes the proposal of a Uni-
ﬁed logic and Constraint problem solver — alleged to be a semantic-web-based
decision-making framework for implementing case scenarios using the SWCL.
The Epsilon Existential Extension of SWRL
Expressiveness: Proposed in [13], the Epsilon extension is another existential
extension designed to allow quantiﬁcation of individuals into OWL ontologies
using SWRL rules.
In this SWRL existential extension, the authors uses a new operator the
Hilbert’s Epsilon ( ϵ), to denote existential quantiﬁcation. However, the main
objective of the proposal is to achieve structural computation in OWL and sub-
sequently, in the SWRL formalism.
Syntax and Semantics: The epsilon operator is employed to deﬁne a ’terminol-
ogy constructor’ (ϵXφ(X)), which on inference, is expected to return anonymous
individuals as ’values of class X’ as results of an existential Formula function
∃X :φ(X). The syntax of the epsilon extension is deﬁned by simply extending the
abstract syntaxes of the ’i-objects’ and ’d-objects’ of SWRL to represent the ep-
silon terminology. While highlighting the limitations of procedural attachments
such as SWRL built-ins, and the ineﬃciencies involved in using ﬁrst order logic
extensions, the semantics of the epsilon extension were described in [13] with
theories and technical case study showing the use of the new operator. However,
the discussion failed to show the usability of the new operator in SWRL rules
and no supporting reasoners were mentioned.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: In order to utilize the epsilon extension, an in-
depth understanding of the theory of Hilbert’s Epsilon operator seems to be
inevitable. As no example SWRL rules were presented on how to utilize the new
operator, implementation of the epsilon extension is still open for discussion.
Moreover, the new operator seems to only increase the complexity of the SWRL
formalism in achieving existential quantiﬁcation when compared to the previous
existential extensions discussed.
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 25
In addition, it should be noted that a turn-around fashion of creating new in-
dividuals in SWRL rules is possible with the use of the followings: (i) the OWL
class construct owl:someValuesFrom — thereby achieving existential quantiﬁ-
cation as class assertions. (ii) Alternatively, the SWRL built-in swrlx: make-
OWLThings (discussed as part of SWRL Builtin extensions in section 2.6), also
allow direct creation of individuals in SWRL-enabled ontologies. Though, infer-
ence on the swrlx:makeOWLThings built-in will result in free individuals that
cannot be classiﬁed into the ontology. (iii) SWRL can also achieve existential
quantiﬁcation using the restriction owl:someValuesFrom to directly creates new
individuals into OWL classes. Even though the resulting quantiﬁcation does con-
form to DL-safeness, such existential formulation using a restriction can be hard
to implement in practice and has been criticized as being inconvenient.
2.5 SWRL Extension for Advanced Mathematical Support
As a semantic web rule language, modeling knowledge for, and across, all types
of domains should be possible using the SWRL formalism. This includes com-
plex mathematical equations, typically used in engineering applications. While
SWRL’s mathematical built-ins support the basic arithmetic operations such
as addition, subtraction, comparison, string and Boolean operations, etc. There
is, therefore, a need for extending SWRL to handle complex mathematical and
engineering computations such as polynomials, integration, diﬀerentiation, sum-
mation, etc.
The OpenMath Extension of SWRL
Expressiveness: To this end, Lopez and others in [36] propose the combination
of SWRL built-ins with the ’OpenMath’6 model to provide advanced mathemat-
ical support in SWRL. The OpenMath is an extensible representation standard
as well as an evolving interchange framework for sharing and publishing math-
ematical objects and their semantics. It is basically, a markup language and a
representation standard for mathematical objects.
The aim of SWRL-Openmath extension is to allow expressing scientiﬁc knowl-
edge using formulas. Using the functionalities of OpenMath, an additional SWRL
built-in swrlbext:mathext (with three basic arguments) was designed to extend
the SWRL built-ins ontology class. In essence, the ’SWRL-OpenMath’ exten-
sion extends the SWRL formalism with a feature that evaluates and reason over
mathematical expressions. By using the built-in (swrlbext: mathext) to deﬁne
functions as instances of a Formula class, the OpenMath extension enables the
representation of complex math operations such as integration, diﬀerentiation,
polynomials, etc.
6 http://www.openmath.org/
26 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Syntax and Semantics: The mathematical expressions are represented using the
OpenMath XML functions. The function parameters, which are assumed to be
already deﬁned in the OWL ontology, are then supplied as part of the SWRL
rules. To allow reuse of the math functions, a Formula class is deﬁned to rep-
resent the OpenMath expressions as datatype values using a special datatype
property called hasOMExpression. The result of the expression i.e. the parame-
ters supplied and the Formula itself, comprises the three arguments deﬁned in
the built-in extension swrlbext:mathext as described in the proposal.
Implementation and Eﬃciency: Apart from utilizing complex operators and
their semantics, the use of OpenMath instead of the classical mathematical op-
erators also helps to separate the mathematical and problem semantics in writing
SWRL rules, thereby giving more clarity to rules representation.
However, the short proposal only gives an overview of the extension with a
draft of a methodology showing how the combination can be achieved and a men-
tion of possible implementation using ’Bossam’ and ’Mathematica’. Moreover,
the implementation details of the extension is unavailable for further analysis. It
should be noted that, the OpenMath extension introduces a rather complex ap-
proach to handle formulas in SWRL as compared to the mathematical built-ins
approach. In addition, the proposal failed to discuss reasoning supports for the
OpenMath SWRL extension and is curiously silent on the overall decidability of
the combination.
2.6 SWRL Built-in Extensions — Addressing SWRL limitations
through Built-ins
Discussion on SWRL extensions can never be complete without mentioning the
SWRL built-ins7. Simply put, SWRL built-ins are procedural attachments used
to augment the expressive powers of the original SWRL language deﬁnitions.
More formally, a SWRL built-in is deﬁned as ”a predicate that takes one or
more variables as arguments and evaluates to true if the argument satisﬁes the
predicate”. SWRL built-ins consist of the ’core built-in libraries’ for common
operations involving constraints, lists, string, comparison, Boolean, URIs, and
date operations — preceded by the namespace qualiﬁer swrlb:. Moreover, SWRL
built-ins are especially useful as they allow special deﬁnition of domain-speciﬁc,
arbitrary methods called ’user-deﬁned built-ins’ — an important feature of the
SWRL formalism that allows users to deﬁne new built-in libraries for special
tasks. Core built-ins such as the mathematical operators, and built-ins for string
and date operations were deﬁned in the original SWRL speciﬁcation.
Implementation: Deﬁning SWRL built-in extension is possible either directly
in OWL or through their corresponding java implementations made possible by
the SWRLBuiltInBbridge. The SWRLBuiltInBbridge is a component of the open-
sourced SWRLTab of the Prot´ eg´ e ontology editor, which allows the manipulation
7 http://www.daml.org/2004/04/swrl/builtins.html
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 27
of SWRL built-ins using Java. User-deﬁned OWL-based built-in deﬁnitions can
be achieved by simply adding them as new instances to theswrl:Builtin class pre-
deﬁned in the SWRL deﬁnition ontology. Relevant built-ins are usually grouped
together in a single OWL ﬁle, which can be imported into any domain ontology
for utilization. A Java implementation of the built-ins, wrapped in a JAR ﬁle is
however needed in the Prot´ eg´ e-OWL plugins directory for the Built-in bridge to
make the necessary run-time linkages. A good example is the SWRL-Inference
and Query tool, popularly termed as the SWRL-IQ — originally deﬁned as a
”plugin for Prot´ eg´ e version 3.x that allows users to edit, save, and submit queries
to an underlying inference engine based on XSB Prolog.” The built-in extension
(swrl-extension.owl) basically contains user-deﬁned predicates, implemented for
use in the SWRL Inference and Query Tool (SWRLIQ).
In what follows, we brieﬂy review some of the most popular as well as stan-
dardized SWRL built-in extensions, such as the temporal built-ins, the mathe-
matical built-ins, the semantic web query language (SQWRL), and the Existen-
tial built-ins of SWRL:
SWRL Temporal Built-ins
Expressiveness: Due to the limited temporal support in both OWL and SWRL,
another notable example in the SWRL expressiveness extensions is the SWRL
Temporal Built-in Library [7].
Deﬁned as part of the SWRL-API’s built-in library, the temporal built-ins
are hierarchically deﬁned in the SWRL temporal ontology. The SWRL temporal
model is designed to allow easy representation of temporal knowledge in SWRL-
based ontologies. The temporal ontology provides a standard model for modeling
the temporal domain facts. As a result, the built-ins allow temporal reasoning
on OWL ontologies using SWRL rules.
Syntax and Semantics: The temporal built-ins provide a rich set of temporal
operators such as before, after, during, duration, contains, overlaps, etc. and are
normally preceded by the name-space qualiﬁer ’temporal:’. Based on the time
data they operate, the SWRL temporal built-ins were categorized into basic
and advanced mode. In the basic mode, SWRL temporal built-ins operates on
arguments supplied by the XML Schema’s ’date’ and ’dateTime’ data types —
supplied as xsd:String with values such as second, hour, day, time, week, month,
year, etc. Whereas in the advanced mode, the SWRL temporal built-ins works
on time information that is completely encoded using the ’valid-time’ temporal
model .
As an example, a rule that asserts the ’Fellow’ membership rank by catego-
rizing all registered Workgroup members with registration dates before the year
28 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
2000 can be written as:
WorkgroupMember (?m) ∧ hasRegDate(?m, ?rd)
∧ temporal :before(?rd,′ 2000′)−→
FellowMembers (?m) (18)
SWRL-M Built-ins — A Complex Mathematical Built-in Library.
Expressiveness: Apart from the basic arithmetic operations available in the orig-
inal SWRL deﬁnition, a SWRL-M built-in extension, was recommended to allow
SWRL rules to handle more mathematical expressions. Deﬁned as part of the
SWRL Inference and Query Languages (SWRLIQ) [12], the extension introduces
complex math operations as an advancement to the core mathematical built-in
library. It is eﬁned as part of the SWRL Mathematical Ontology and written
with the preﬁx swrlm: as its pseudonym.
Syntax and Semantics: Common mathematical operations allowed in SWRLM
built-in library include among others; the square root operation, swrlm:sqrt(?x,
a) and the evaluate expressive function, swrlm:eval(?x, ”expression”). The latter
is designed to support the evaluation of the ontology variable x against standard
constants and functions such as pi (π), epsilon (ϵ), Lin (ln), etc. For example, a
SQWRL query that ”returns a random number between 0 and 1” can be written
as:
swrlm :eval(?x, ”rand()”)−→sqwrl :select(?x) (19)
Eﬃciency: The SWRL-M built-in provides a simple and eﬃcient way of dealing
with complex math operations — especially when compared to the OpenMath
extension (section 2.5). However, the simplicity also has its price as the SWRL-
M built-ins collection falls short in representing many advanced mathematical
expressions, some of which are highlighted in section 2.5.
The restriction is a classical issue of modeling languages, i.e. the need to
balance between tractability and degree of expressiveness. And as mathematical
extensions involving recursive functions in rules usually makes inference non-
terminating — and hence entailment undecidable, there is the need for careful
design of built-in functions to ensure that predicates introduced remain decid-
able.
SWRLX Built-ins — The SWRL Existentials Built-in Library
Expressiveness: Considering the need to create new individuals using the clas-
sical SWRL deﬁnition and without relying on external extensions, the SWRL
existential built-in (swrlx:makeOWLThings) is deﬁned in [41]. It is deﬁned in the
SWRLX Ontology and written using the ’swrlx:’ preﬁx. The built-in is designed
to ease explorative modeling in SWRL. Speciﬁcally, the existential quantiﬁca-
tions — see section 2.4. Creating new individuals using SWRL built-in can be
of particular importance, especially in the execution of mapping rules.
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 29
Syntax and Semantics: Using the SWRLX built-in model, creating new indi-
viduals is made possible using the swrlx:makeOWLThings method and which
has at least one free variable as its argument. The semantics being that the
swrlx:makeOWLThings will create a new individual of type owl:Thing and binds
it to the free variable in the method’s argument. In essence, the axiomswrlx:make
OWLThings(?x, ?y) — ”will cause a new individual to be created and bounded
to ?x for every value of the matching variable ?y in the rule”.
Now consider an example SWRLX rule in (20), which creates a new individual
for every membership ID of the WorkgroupMembers class and then asserts the
new individual into the ’Editors’ class.
WorkgroupMember (?m) ∧ hasMemberID (?m,
?mID)∧ swrlx:makeOWLThings(?ed, ?mID)
−→Editors(?ed) (20)
Eﬃciency and Decidability: Creating new individuals using SWRL built-in can
be of particular importance, especially in the execution of mapping rules. The
advantage of swrlx:makeOWLThings method over other existential quantiﬁca-
tions is that it oﬀers a simple and direct method of creating new individuals
in SWRL-based ontologies. However, as the new individuals created will simply
be of type ’owl:Thing’, it cannot be further classiﬁed by a reasoner into any
particular class type. This may result in redundant unbounded individuals in
the main ontology. As such an eﬃcient and careful use of the built-in requires
that a class be predeﬁned in the ontology to collate the new individuals created.
Another safe implementation, as the authors advised, will be to completely avoid
storing the new individuals into the main ontology. However, SWRL built-ins
still remains limited in extending the semantic web rule language to represent
non-conventional domain knowledge. While those already deﬁned, could beneﬁt
from well-documented constructs with more eﬃcient syntax and semantics.
In conclusion, SWRL built-ins certainly increase the expressiveness of SWRL
and the possibility of user-deﬁned SWRL built-ins means that domain-speciﬁc
extensions can always be deﬁned to extend SWRL’s expressive powers. Other
built-ins not expanded in our discussion here, includes the query extension built-
ins such as the OWL-Axioms: the T-Box, A-Box, and R-Box built-in libraries,
which allows querying knowledge stored in the: terminology box, the assertions
box and the Relations sets of OWL ontologies. Note: special query built-ins were
grouped together to form the Semantic Query Web Rule Language (SQWRL)
built-ins [29]. Thus to improve their usability, syntax of these built-in extensions
need to be improved with well-deﬁned semantics within the DL-safety restriction.
3 Decidability of SWRL Expressiveness Extensions
From the foregoing review of the various expressiveness extensions added to
SWRL, one may be interested in asking the question, ”What then, could be the
30 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
largest decidable extension of the semantic web rule language?” While an obvious
answer could be the DL-Safe extensions, there is still the need to evaluate which
assemblage of these extensions can still remain decidable. Where the combination
is no longer DL-safe, then what restrictions could be imposed for the combination
to remain decidable. This is particularly important in achieving inference and
to ensure usability of these extensions.
In practical terms, Decidability refers to the ability of a Reasoner to clas-
sify and achieve inference over a given piece of ontology within a ﬁnite time.
While basic SWRL rules can be kept decidable through the DL-Safety restric-
tion, most of the SWRL expressiveness extensions can hardly be kept decidable
by employing similar restriction. Such extensions that work within the fringes
of decidability, such as the existential extensions, need to be carefully tailored
to ensure that their usage do not cause inconsistencies to the resulting ontology.
For example, the XSWRL extension [23], which adds new individuals using ex-
istentially quantiﬁed variables is clearly non Dl-safe and therefore, undecidable.
This is because, unbounded variables are bound to be introduced into the ontol-
ogy, possibly creating anonymous individuals or cyclic chains in rule execution.
As such for the XSWRL extension to be decidable, there must not be any chain
of existentials (whether cyclic or acyclic) in rule executions. In what follows,
we brieﬂy discuss the conditions needed to maintain the decidability of all the
reviewed SWRL extensions:
Decidability of Non-monotonic SWRL Extensions: As the authors of [6] de-
scribed, decidability issues involving unbound variables can be resolved through
careful management of their syntax or semantics during the inference process.
For example, in the case of the ’not’ Operator — negation as failure (see Table
1). Here, decidability is achieved by controlling the appearance of the unbound
variable in the consequent of the SWRL rule. In essence, the unbound variable
(?z), whose inference can result in anonymous negative property assertions from
the new elements not(P(x; y)) and not(Q(x; y)), was deliberately introduced so
as not to use the bounded variables ’?x’ or ’?y’ in the consequent of the extended
SWRL syntax. In eﬀect, while the negation of the object or datatype property
assertions P or Q holds, the resulting unbound variable (?z) that hold this mo-
mentary value will not appear in any other case or rule atoms and therefore the
knowledge base remains decidable.
Similarly, in order to preserve the decidability of the main ontology while us-
ing the proposed NotExists ( ∄) quantiﬁer (see Table 2), the unbounded variable
introduced is semantically deﬁned to match all the individual IDs available in
the ontology. In other words, the free variable is interpreted to be ’universally
satisﬁable’. This condition ensures that the execution of the operator does not re-
sult in any modiﬁcation of the existing ontology and therefore remains decidable.
Other forms of the non-monotonic SWRL extensions, such as the ’Mutex’ and
’Dominance’ operators, do not have a direct consequence on the content of the
ontology and therefore may not aﬀect its decidability or otherwise. However, the
Mutex and Dominance operators, which controls and prioritizes the sequence of
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 31
rule executions resp., can be used to control the Decidability of SWRL ontologies
during the inference process. This is because, by enabling the Reasoner to block
and/or schedule rule execution plan, they mimic the feature of the inference
process. As such, undecidable rule fragments can be dominated or muted where
necessary to achieve consistency.
Decidability of Fuzzy SWRL Extensions: Theoretically, the decidability of f-
SWRL extension is not debatable considering that the extension simply intro-
duces weighted values (see section 2.1) to justify the importance of certain facts
over others. Speciﬁcally, the class assertion, property assertion and rules axioms
of SWRL were extended to show the degree of conﬁdence of such assertions. As
such, f-SWRL ontology — and by extension the Vague-SWRL ontology, can be
assumed decidable as long as their OWL class and property axioms conform to
the DL-safety restrictions. While the semantics of the fuzzy axioms, such as class
and property inclusion axioms may have diﬀerent interpretations from the origi-
nal SWRL, the concepts introduced in most of the fuzzy-based SWRL extensions
reviewed, do not seem to invalidate the DL-Safeness principle and can therefore,
be expected to remain decidable. This can be seen from the fact that no new
concepts or anonymous individuals are expected from these extensions nor the
interpretation of their syntax — which in most cases is closely similar to the
original SWRL. For example, the comparable SWRL-F extension (see section
2.1) introduces the concept of fuzzy ontology as a separate entity to maintain
consistency. As such its inference has no direct inﬂuence to the consistency of
the main ontology. Inherently, the Decidability of this extension also follows the
DL-Safety restriction of the SWRL rules.
Decidability of SWRL First Order Logic (FOL) Extensions: FOL-based lan-
guages are generally undecidable and logical formalisms extending FOL, such
as the SWRL-FOL, are usually so — unless where they are restricted by some
semantic or syntactic completeness theorems. The SWRL FOL extension(see sec-
tion 2.4) introduces assertion axioms that contain ﬁrst-order formulae. However,
the restriction is that quantiﬁed variables must be bound to their corresponding
OWL typed quantiﬁers — meaning that no ’free’, ’anonymous’ or ’unbounded’
variables should exists in the rules. In such cases, the decidability of SWRL-
FOL extension can also be said to be inherent in the DL-safety restriction of
the component SWRL ontology. As the authors of SWRL introductory paper
[17], expressed regarding the semantic interpretation of FOL assertions; ”An on-
tology is consistent if-and-only-if it is satisﬁed by at least one interpretation”
Moreover, neither n-ary predicates nor functions were directly included in the
SWRL-FOL abstract syntax as they do not ﬁt with OWL and by extension the
SWRL paradigm.
Decidability of SWRL Built-in Extensions: Built-in extensions basically means
that the extension utilizes the abstract syntax and semantics of the SWRL rule
language. As such, poses no decidability issues as long as the extensions are used
within the DL-safety limits.
32 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Most of the SWRL mathematical and temporal extensions were added as
built-in predicates to the original SWRL deﬁnition in order to avoid the de-
cidability and complexity overheads. Other cases, where major extensions were
added, such as the ’OpenMath’ extension discussed in section 2.5, the func-
tionalities were strategically added based on a distinct separation between the
mathematical and problem semantics. This is possible considering the fact that
the mathematical functions operates on existing domain knowledge as input.
Moreover, as the OpenMath extension also uses the built-in ( swrlbext: mathext)
to deﬁne functions as instances of the Formula class, which are then solved us-
ing a constraint solver. Due to the modularity, the main ontology is thus free of
the inconsistencies that may arise during math operations. Hence the extension
basically follows the decidability of basic SWRL built-ins, the DL-safety.
4 Discussion and Summary
As categorically summarized in Table 3, various extensions to SWRL syntax and
semantics have been proposed and justiﬁed as necessary expressiveness exten-
sions of the rule language. While the paper present them as six categories for clar-
ity, the extensions can be basically summarized into four categories, viz. the (i)
Uncertainty management extensions — comprising of the fuzzy and probabilis-
tic extensions, (ii) the Non-monotonic extensions — comprising of the negation,
quantiﬁers, rules ordering and prioritization, as well as the existential extensions,
(iii) the Advanced mathematical extension featuring the SWRL-OpenMath ex-
tension, and lastly, (iv) the SWRL Built-in extensions.
In the fuzzy extension category, we discussed the SWRL-F, Vague-SWRL,
F-SWRL, and FNSWRL, all of which were aimed at extending SWRL to enable
the representation of uncertainties or incomplete information. The extensions ba-
sically involve the use of fuzzy logic principles, speciﬁcally the fuzzy and vague
sets, to extend the description logic of the SWRL formalism. Their similarity is
apparent in their use of the fuzzy weight to denote the degree of membership
for individual instances of the fuzzy class or property within a SWRL axiom.
An exception to this similarity is the ’F-SWRL extension’ — which introduces
a fuzzymatch operator for representing uncertainties based on the principles of
fuzzy control system. A probabilistic extension of the SWRL formalism, ’Bayes-
SWRL’, was also discussed as another uncertainty-handling or predictive model-
ing extension of SWRL. Bayes-SWRL uses the Bayesian Networks of probability
theory to manage predictive knowledge modeling using SWRL rules. See section
2.1 for details.
Various non-monotonic expressiveness extensions of SWRL have been geared
towards solving the classical negation and the negation as failure (NAF). The
negation extensions were included here only for completeness as the issues have
been thoroughly addressed both in the mainstream OWL and the SWRL’s ab-
stract syntaxes. It is safe to assume that these numerous proposals with their
justiﬁcations lead to the advancement of the abstract deﬁnitions to handle
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 33
the knowledge negation. Other expressiveness extensions discussed in the non-
monotonic category include the existential extensions — introducing existential
operators with syntax such as: the exclamation mark ’!’ in the ’X-SWRL ex-
tension’, the existential ( ∃) and Universal ( ∀) quantiﬁers in section 2.2, the
’ϵ’ operator in the SWRL epsilon extension, and the ’makeOWLThing’ operator
proposed in the SWRLX built-in deﬁnition. All these extensions were recognized
to allow a safe creation of individual instances to an OWL class or property, ex-
cept the ’makeOWLThing’ built-in — where the resulting instance is beyond the
inference of existing OWL reasoners.
As domain knowledge is ever-evolving, there is sometimes the need to control
the execution of rules or even retract some facts based on new found information.
These challenges were addressed through rules ordering (using the ’dominance’
operation), rule exclusion (using the ’mutex’ operation) and facts removal, using
the notExists operator ( ∄). These extensions (See sections 2.2-2.4), which obvi-
ously entails the essence of non-monotonicity, were thence summarized in Table
3 as non-monotonic extensions of SWRL.
Advanced mathematical extensions of the SWRL formalism through built-ins
were also discussed. The category introduces a special built-in extension based
on the OpenMath language syntax and semantics. The ’SWRL-OpenMath’ ex-
tension involves the use of OpenMath functionalities to enable expressing math-
ematical formulas and scientiﬁc equations in SWRL. Another more classical
approach in this categoryis the ’SWRLM extension’, which introduces advanced
math operations, beyond those in the core SWRL deﬁnition. SWRLM extension
handle operations such as the square-root (swrlm:sqrt), natural log (swrlm:ln),
etc. Another important built-in extension is the SWRL Temporal extension,
which do not directly falls under any of the above four categories, was also dis-
cussed to highlight how time-related domain information and temporal facts can
be expressed using SWRL rules. See sections 2.5-2.6 for details. We present a
compacted summary of these extensions and their component syntax and se-
mantics in Table 3 below.
Table 3: Table of Summary for SWRL Extensions
SWRL
Extension
Added Syntax Added Semantics Extension
Type
Fuzzy-SWRL
(f-SWRL)
Fuzzy class assertion:
C(x) * w.
Fuzzy property asser-
tion: P(x,y) * w.
Where: w∈ [0, 1].
Introduces a truth value
’w’, to specify degree of
conﬁdence for individual
membership in a Class or
Property.
Fuzzy
Extension
34 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
Vague-SWRL Introduces a second-
degree weight, w2 to
f-SWRL syntax.
Denote second degree of
membership:
w and w2 speciﬁes the
upper and lower bounds
of membership intervals
in a Class or Property.
Fuzzy
Extension
SWRL
Fuzzy (SWRL-F)
Introduce a fuzzy match-
ing operator:
fuzzymatch(?x, ’fuzzy-
value’)
Matches corresponding
fuzzy variables with
designated fuzzy values
from fuzzy sets.
Fuzzy
Extension
Fuzzy Non-
monotonic
SWRL (f-
NSWRL)
Fuzzy weight (w), ’Not’
and ’¬’ operators.
Same as the F-SWRL
and Negation extensions.
Fuzzy-Non-
monotonic
Extension.
Bayes-SWRL Probability weight (the
p-variable, p) Class as-
sertion:
C(x) * px.
Property assertion:
P(x, y) * pxy.
Where: p [0, 1].
The p-variable ( p)
matches the probability
of Class or Property as-
sertions with predeﬁned
values in a conditional
probability table (CPT).
Probabilistic Ex-
tension
Negation The ’not’ and ’¬’ opera-
tors
Negation of existing con-
cepts and asserting neg-
ative facts
Non-monotonic
Extension
SWRL Quanti-
ﬁers
Exists (∃X) operator Asserts new instances of
the quantiﬁed variable x.
Non-monotonic
notExists ( ∄X) operator
in antecedent
Check for missing facts.
notExists ( ∄X) operator
in consequent
Removal of Knowledge
forAll (∀X) Group-wise assertions
Dominance Dominance operator:
dominance(Rx,R y),
R = rule identiﬁer
Implies: Rule Rx has
more priority in the ex-
ecution order than Ry
Rules
Ordering
(P riority)
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 35
Mutex Mutex operator:
Mutex(Rx,R y), R
= rule identiﬁer
Implies: RuleRy will not
be executed in the event
that Rx is already exe-
cuted
Rule
Exclusion
Extended SWRL
(XSWRL)
Existential operator’!’
e.g. existentially quanti-
ﬁed variable (!x)
Creates new individuals
that satisfy the variable,
x.
Non-monotonic
Existential
Extension
SWRL-FOL/
CIF-SWRL
The ’ForAll (∀)’ and ’Ex-
ists (∃)’ operators
Imposes ﬁrst order logic
(FOL) quantiﬁcation op-
erations on the SWRL
variables
FOL
Extensions
Epsilon Exten-
sion
The terminology con-
structor ϵXφ(X)
Creates new individuals
as ’values of’ class X.
Quantiﬁcation
extensions
SWRL Open-
Math
The math built-in:
swrlbext :mathext
Uses the functionalities
of OpenMath to create
additional built-ins
Advanced Math
Ext.
SWRL Temporal Duration operations,
Allen’s Temporal in-
tervals, add/subtract
operations e.g.
temporal:before(T1, T2)
Implements temporal
operations as predicates
on valid-time data
Built-in Exten-
sions
SWRLM Complex Mathematical
operations (evaluate,
square-root, natural log)
e.g. swrlm : eval(?area,
”width * height”, ?width,
?height)
Implements mathemati-
cal functions as predi-
cates
Built-in Exten-
sions
SWRLX Existential Built-
in e.g. swrlx:make-
OWLThings(?x, ?y)
Creates new individuals
of type owl : T hing
Built-in Exten-
sions
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we presented the SWRL formalism, discussed its expressive limita-
tions and then reviewed the expressiveness extensions proposed to manage those
limitations. The review discussed the various fuzzy and probabilistic extensions
of SWRL, non-monotonic extensions, existentials, advanced mathematical ex-
tensions, as well as the SWRL built-in extensions. We undertaken this review
of common SWRL expressiveness extensions with the aim of asserting SWRL’s
36 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
overall expressivity and further highlighted its level of acceptance within the
semantic web community. From the foregoing, it is evident that much of the
available SWRL extensions have been directed towards solving three major is-
sues, namely the uncertainties in domain knowledge, the non-monotonicity, and
the representation of mathematical knowledge.
Based on our observation, usability of SWRL rules and its expressiveness exten-
sions may be limited due to the following reasons: (i) Lack of readily-available
reasoners that can draw inference on the new extensions within decidable portion
of the language, (ii) Modeling real-world problems using SWRL is still at the
research stage, with little large-scale developmental eﬀorts, (iii) the availability
of alternative rule and query languages such as SPARQL and RuleML that are
able to achieve (usually in a turnaround fashion), some of the current limitations
of SWRL. Though the RuleML is originally not designed to be a rule language,
however, its adoption may have caused much decline to the use of SWRL.
In future works, we would like to further evaluate the practicalities of the
many theoretical extensions reviewed and further validate the inference/decidability
of the implemented SWRL extensions. Another research gap identiﬁed is the
’need for standardization’— as some of the extensions can only be useful in lo-
calized application domains while few others require more justiﬁed syntax and
semantics. It is hoped that-with the continuous development eﬀorts on SWRL
expressive powers and usability, it can evolve into a comprehensive and complete
ontology rule language for the semantic web.
Acknowledgement. This work was partially supported by a Grant received
through the CFFRC scheme, Govt. of Malaysia as project number CFFRCPLUS-
CropB1-001. We also thank Dr. Natasha Alechina for her valuable and construc-
tive comments on earlier drafts of the manuscript.
Bibliography
[1] Agarwal, S., Hitzler, P.: Modeling fuzzy rules with description logics. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings 188(5) (2005)
[2] Antoniou, G., van Harmelen, F. (eds.): Semantic Web Primer - Second
Edition. MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England (2008)
[3] Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D.L., Nardi, D., Patel-Schneider,
P.F. (eds.): The Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and
Applications. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA (2003)
[4] Berners-Lee, T.: Semantic Web and Linked Data (2009), http://www.w3.
org/2009/Talks/0204-campus-party-tbl/
[5] Boris, M., Bernardo, C.G., Horrocks, I., Zhe, W., Achille, F., Carsten, L.:
OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Proﬁles ( Second Edition ). W3C Recom-
mendation (December), 1–43 (2012)
[6] Calero, J.M.A., Ortega, A., Perez, G.G.M., Blaya, J.A.B., Skarmeta,
A.F.G.: A Non-monotonic Expressiveness Extension on the Semantic Web
Rule Language. Journal of Web Eng . . . 11(2)(0), 93–118 (2012), http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2230897
[7] Connor, M.J.O.: A Method for Representing and Querying Temporal In-
formation in OWL. Communications in Computer and Information Science
127 CCIS,(January 2011), 97–110 (2011)
[8] Da Costa, P.C.G., Laskey, K.B., Laskey, K.J.: Pr-owl: A bayesian ontology
language for the semantic web. In: Proceedings of the 2005 International
Conference on Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web - Volume 173.
pp. 23–33. URSW’05, CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, Germany, Germany (2005),
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2889849.2889852
[9] Darwiche, D.: Bayesian networks. Communications of the ACM 53(12), 80–
90 (2010)
[10] Ding, Z., Peng, Y., Pan, R.: BayesOWL: Uncertainty modeling in semantic
web ontologies. Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing 204, 3–29 (2006)
[11] Eiter, T., Ianni, G., Lukasiewicz, T., Schindlauer, R., Tompits, H.: Combin-
ing answer set programming with description logics for the semantic web.
Artif. Intell. 172(12-13), 1495–1539 (Aug 2008), http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.artint.2008.04.002
[12] Elenius, D., Riehemann, S.: Swrl-iq user manual (2012), http://
protegewiki.stanford.edu/images/5/57/SWRL-IQ_manual.pdf
[13] Elenius, D., Stehr, M.o.: Rules and Computation on the Seman-
tic Web, https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/717c/fc3f88953e05e\
0b8d03d381d5fa50429f919.pdf
[14] Gau, W.L., Buehrer, D.J.: Vague sets. IEEE transactions on systems, man,
and cybernetics 23(2), 610–614 (1993)
[15] Horn, A.: On Sentences Which are True of Direct Unions of Algebras. J.
Symb. Log. 16(1), 14–21 (1951)
38 A. Lawan and A. Rakib
[16] Horrocks, I., Patel-Schneider, P.F., Bechhofer, S., Tsarkov, D.: Owl rules:
A proposal and prototype implementation. Web Semant. 3(1), 23–40 (Jul
2005), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2005.05.003
[17] Horrocks, I., Patel-schneider, P.F., Bechhofer, S., Tsarkov, D.: OWL rules: A
proposal and prototype implementation. Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web 3(1), 23–40 (jul 2005), http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/\S1570826805000053
[18] Horrocks, I., Patel-Schneider, P.F., Boley, H., Tabet, S., Grosof, B., Dean,
M., et al.: Swrl: A semantic web rule language combining owl and ruleml.
W3C Member submission 21, 79 (2004)
[19] Kifer, M., Brook, S.: Requirements for an Expressive Rule Language on
the Semantic Web. W3C Workshop on Rules Languages (April) (2005),
http://www.w3.org/2004/12/rules-ws/paper/34/
[20] Kim, H.J., Kim, W., Lee, M.: Semantic web constraint language and its ap-
plication to an intelligent shopping agent. Decision Support Systems 46(4),
882–894 (2009)
[21] Kim, W., Lee, M., Hong, J., Wang, T., Kim, H.: Merging Mathematical
Constraint Knowledge with the Semantic Web using a Semantic Web Con-
straint Language. Iconceptpress.Com 2003(October 2009) (2003), http:
//www.iconceptpress.com/download/paper/100618194339.pdf
[22] Klir, G.J., Yuan, B.: Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic: Theory and Applications.
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA (1995)
[23] Li, W., Tian, S.: XSWRL, an extended semantic web rule language
and prototype implementation. Expert Systems with Applications 38(3),
2040–2045 (mar 2011), http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/\S0957417410007694
[24] Liu, Y., Chen, S., Li, S., Wang, Y.: Bayes-SWRL: A probabilistic extension
of SWRL. Proceedings - 9th International Conference on Computational
Intelligence and Security, CIS 2013 1, 702–706 (2013)
[25] McGuinness, D.L., Van Harmelen, F., et al.: Owl web ontology language
overview. W3C recommendation 10(10), 2004 (2004)
[26] McKenzie, C., Gray, P., Preece, A.: Extending SWRL to express fully-
quantiﬁed constraints. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including
subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics) 3323 LNCS, 139–154 (2004), http://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-30504-0{_}11
[27] Mei, J., Bontas, E.P.: Reasoning paradigms for swrl-enabled ontologies
(2005)
[28] Motik, B., Grau, B.C., Horrocks, I., Wu, Z., Fokoue, A., Lutz, C.:
OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Proﬁles (2009), http://www.w3.org/TR/
owl2-profiles/
[29] O’Connor, M., Das, A.: Sqwrl: A query language for owl. In: Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on OWL: Experiences and Directions - Vol-
ume 529. pp. 208–215. OWLED’09, CEUR-WS.org, Aachen, Germany, Ger-
many (2009), http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2890046.2890072
SWRL Expressiveness Extensions— A Survey 39
[30] Pan, J.Z., Stoilos, G., Stamou, G., Tzouvaras, V., Horrocks, I.: f-swrl: a
fuzzy extension of swrl pp. 28–46 (2006)
[31] Paschke, A., Boley, H.: Rule markup languages and semantic web rule lan-
guages. In: Rule Markup Languages and Semantic Web Rule Languages,
pp. 1–24. IGI Global (2010)
[32] Patel-Schneider, P.F.: A proposal for a swrl extension towards ﬁrst-
order logic. W3C Member Submission, April (2005), http://www.w3.org/
Submission/SWRL-FOL/
[33] Patel-Schneider, P.F., Hayes, P., Horrocks, I., Harmelen, F.: A proposal for
a swrl extension to ﬁrst-order logic. Proposal, DARPA DAML Program
(2004), http://www.daml.org/2004/11/fol/proposal
[34] Predoiu, L.: Probabilistic Models for the Semantic Web — A Survey. Inter-
national Journal of Approximate Reasoning pp. 288–307 (2007)
[35] Rosati, R.: Semantic and computational advantages of the safe integration
of ontologies and rules. Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. (including Subser. Lect.
Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics) 3703 LNCS, 50–64 (2005)
[36] S´ anchez-Maci´ an, A., Pastor, E., de L´ opez Vergara, J.E., L´ opez, D.: Extend-
ing swrl to enhance mathematical support. In: International Conference on
Web Reasoning and Rule Systems. pp. 358–360. Springer (2007)
[37] Shen, G., Huang, Z., Zhu, X., Wang, L., Xiang, G.: Using description log-
ics reasoner for ontology matching. In: Intelligent Information Technology
Application, Workshop on. pp. 30–33. IEEE (2007)
[38] Tim Berners-Lee, J.H., Lassila, O.: The Semantic Web. Scientiﬁc American
Magazine (may 2011)
[39] Wang, X., Ma, Z.M., Xu, C., Cheng, J.: Nonmonotonic fuzzy rules in the
semantic web. In: 2009 Sixth International Conference on Fuzzy Systems
and Knowledge Discovery. vol. 2, pp. 275–279 (Aug 2009)
[40] Wang, X., Ma, Z., Yan, L., Meng, X.: Vague-SWRL: a fuzzy extension of
SWRL. International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems pp.
232–233
[41] Wiki, R.: Swrl existentials, http://wiki.ruleml.org/index.php/SWRL
[42] Wlodarczyk, T.W., Rong, C., O’Connor, M., Musen, M.: Swrl-f: A fuzzy
logic extension of the semantic web rule language. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics. pp.
39:1–39:9. WIMS ’11, ACM, New York, NY, USA (2011),http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/1988688.1988735