
--- PAGE 1 ---
JournalofArtificialIntelligenceResearch55(2016)1059-1090 Submitted10/15;published04/16
Learning Concept Graphs from Online Educational Data
Hanxiao Liu hanxiaol@cs.cmu.edu
Wanli Ma mawanli@cs.cmu.edu
Yiming Yang yiming@cs.cmu.edu
Jaime Carbonell jgc@cs.cmu.edu
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Thispaperaddressesanopenchallengeineducationaldatamining,i.e.,theproblemof
automatically mapping online courses from different providers (universities, MOOCs, etc.)
ontoauniversalspaceofconcepts,andpredictinglatentprerequisitedependencies(directed
links)amongbothconceptsandcourses. Weproposeanovelapproachforinferencewithin
andacrosscourse-levelandconcept-leveldirectedgraphs. Inthetrainingphase,oursystem
projects partially observed course-level prerequisite links onto directed concept-level links;
in the testing phase, the induced concept-level links are used to infer the unknown course-
level prerequisite links. Whereas courses may be specific to one institution, concepts are
sharedacrossdifferentproviders. Thebi-directionalmappingsenableoursystemtoperform
interlingua-style transfer learning, e.g. treating the concept graph as the interlingua and
transferring the prerequisite relations across universities via the interlingua. Experiments
on our newly collected datasets of courses from MIT, Caltech, Princeton and CMU show
promising results.
1. Introduction
The large and growing amounts of online education data present both open challenges and
significant opportunities for machine learning research to enrich educational offerings. One
of the most important challenges is to automatically detect the prerequisite dependencies
among massive quantities of online courses, and to support decision making such as curric-
ula planning for students, and to support course and curriculum design by teachers based
on existing course offerings. One example is to find a coherent sequence of courses among
MOOC offerings from different providers that respect implicit prerequisite relations. A
more specific example would be a new student who just enters a university for a MS or
PhD degree. She is interested in machine learning and data mining courses, but finds it
difficult to choose among many courses which look similar or with ambiguous course titles
to her, such as Machine Learning, Statistical Machine Learning, Applied Machine Learn-
ing, Machine Learning with Large Datasets, Scalable Analytics, Advanced Data Analysis,
Statistics: Data Mining, Intermediate Statistics, Statistical Computing, and so on. Com-
pleting all the courses would imply taking forever to graduate, and possibly waste a big
portion of her time due to the overlapping content. Alternately, if she wants to choose a
small subset, which courses should she include? How should she order the included courses
(cid:13)c2016AIAccessFoundation. Allrightsreserved.
--- PAGE 2 ---
Liu, Ma, Yang, & Carbonell
Courses in University 1 Courses in University 2
E&M Mechanics
Calculus
Differential Eq Matrix A Quantum Matrix A Topology
Algorithms Java Prog
Num Analysis Scalable Algs
Universal Concepts (e.g. Wikipedia Topics)
Figure 1: Theframeworkoftwo-leveldirectedgraphs: Thehigher-levelgraphshavecourses
(nodes) with prerequisite relations (links). The lower-level graph consists of uni-
versal concepts (nodes) and pairwise preference in learning or teaching concepts.
The links between the two levels are system-assigned weights of concepts to each
course.
without sufficient understanding about the prerequisite dependencies? Often prerequisites
are explicit within an academic department but implicit across departments. Moreover, if
she already took several courses in machine learning or data mining through Coursera or in
herundergraduateeducation, howmuchdothosecoursesoverlapwiththenewones? With-
out an accurate representation of content overlap between courses and how the overlapped
content reflects the prerequisite relations, it is difficult to help her find the most suitable
courses in a correct order. Universities solve this problem in the old-fashioned way, via
academic advisors, but it is not clear how to address this problem in the context of MOOCs
or cross-university offerings where courses do not have unique IDs and are not described in
a universally controlled or consistent vocabulary.
Ideally, we would like to have a universal graph whose nodes are canonical and discrim-
inant concepts (e.g. “convexity” or “eigenvalues”) being taught in a broad range of courses,
and whose links indicate pairwise preferences in sequencing the teaching of these concepts.
For example, to learn the concepts of PageRank and HITS, students should have already
learned the concepts of eigenvectors, Markov matrices and irreducibility of matrices. This
means directed links from eigenvectors, Markov matrices and irreducibility to PageRank
and HITS in the concept graph. To generalize this further, if there are many directed links
from the concepts in one course (say Matrix Algebra) to the concepts in another course (say
Web Mining with Link Analysis as a sub-topic), we may infer a prerequisite relation be-
tween the two courses. Clearly, having a directed graph with a broad coverage of universal
1060
--- PAGE 3 ---
Learning Concept Graphs from Online Educational Data
concepts is crucial for reasoning about course content overlap and prerequisite relation-
ships, and hence important for educational decision making, such as curriculum planning
by students and modularization in course syllabus design by instructors.
How can we obtain such a knowledge-rich concept graph? Manual specification is obvi-
ously not scalable when the number of concepts reaches tens of thousands or larger. Using
machine learning to automatically induce such a graph based on massive online course ma-
terials is an attractive alternative; however, no statistical learning techniques have been
developed for this problem, to our knowledge. Addressing this open challenge with princi-
pled algorithmic solutions is the novel contribution we aim to accomplish in this paper. We
call our new method Concept Graph Learning (CGL). Specifically, we propose a multi-level
inference framework as illustrated in Figure 1, which consists of two levels of graphs and
cross-level links. Generally, a course would cover multiple concepts, and a concept may
be covered by more than one course. Notice that the course-level graphs do not overlap
because different universities do not have universal course IDs. However, the semantic con-
ceptstaughtindifferentuniversitiesdooverlap, andwewanttolearnthemappingsbetween
the non-universal courses and the universal concept space based on online course materials.
In this paper we investigate the problem of concept graph learning (CGL) with our new
collections of course syllabi (including course names, descriptions, listed lectures, prerequi-
site relations, etc.) from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), California Institute
of Technology (Caltech), Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) and Princeton. The syllabus
data allow us to construct an initial course-level graph for each university, which may be
further enriched by discovering latent prerequisite links. As for representing the universal
concept space, we study four representation schemes (Section 2.1), including 1) using the
English words in course descriptions, 2) using sparse coding of English words, 3) using
distributed word embedding of English words, and 4) using a large subset of Wikipedia
categories. For each of these representation schemes, we provide algorithmic solutions to
establish a mapping from courses to concepts, and to learn the concept-level dependen-
cies based on observed prerequisite relations at the course level. The second part, i.e., the
explicit learning of the directed graph for universal concepts, is the most unique part of
our proposed framework. Once the concept graph is learned, we can predict unobserved
prerequisite relations among any courses, including those not in the training set and by dif-
ferent universities. In other words, CGL enables an interlingua-style transfer learning as to
train the models on the course materials of some universities and to predict the prerequisite
relations for the courses in other universities. The universal transferability is particularly
desirable in MOOC environments where courses are offered by different instructors in many
universities. Aswementionedbefore, thecourse-levelsub-graphsofdifferentuniversitiesdo
not overlap with each other, and the prerequisite links are only local within each sub-graph.
Thus to enable cross-university transfer, it is crucial to project course-level prerequisite
links in different universities onto the directed links among universal concepts.
Thebi-directionalinferencebetweenthetwodirectedgraphsmakesourCGLframework
fundamentally different from existing approaches in graph-based link detection (Kunegis &
Lommatzsch, 2009; Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2007; Lichtenwalter, Lussier, & Chawla,
2010), matrix completion (Cand`es & Recht, 2009; Fazel, 2002; Johnson, 1990) and collabo-
rative filtering (Su & Khoshgoftaar, 2009). That is, our approach requires explicit learning
1061
--- PAGE 4 ---
Liu, Ma, Yang, & Carbonell
of the concept-level directed graph and the optimal mapping between the two levels of links
while other methods do not (see Section 7 for more discussion).
Our main contributions in this paper1 can be summarized as:
1. A novel framework for within- and cross-level inference of prerequisite relations at the
course-level and the concept-level directed graphs;
2. New algorithmic solutions for scalable concept graph learning under various (dense,
sparse and transductive) settings;
3. Newdatacollectionsfrommultipleuniversitieswithsyllabusdescriptions,prerequisite
links and lecture materials;
4. The first evaluation for prerequisite link prediction in within- and cross-university
settings.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the formal definitions
of our framework and optimization objectives; Section 3 provides scalable algorithms for
learning large concept graphs; Section 4 extends our new method to learn a sparse, parsi-
monious concept graph for better interpretability; Section 5 explores how unlabeled course
pairs can be leveraged to significantly improve the prediction performance of the learned
concept graph; Section 6 describes the new datasets we collected for this study and future
benchmark evaluations, and reports our empirical findings; Section 7 discusses related work
and how concept graphs can be deployed to benefit future educational applications; and
Section 8 summarizes the main findings in this study.
2. Framework & Algorithms
Let us formally define our methods with the following notation.
• n is the number of courses in a training set;
• p is the dimension of the universal concept space (Section 2.1);
• X = [x ,x ,...,x ](cid:62) ∈ Rn×p is a collection of n courses, where x ∈ Rp is the bag-of-
1 2 n i
concepts representation of the i-th course;
• Y ∈ {−1,+1}n×n is a collection of n2 binary indicators of the observed prerequisite
relations between courses, i.e., y = 1 means that course j is a prerequisite of course
ij
i, and y = −1 otherwise.
ij
• A ∈ Rp×p istheadjacencymatrixoftheconceptgraph,whoseelementsaretheweights
of directed links among concepts. That is, A is the matrix of model parameters we
want to optimize given the training data in X and Y.
1. Thisjournalpaperisasubstantiallyextendedversionofapreviouspaper(Yang,Liu,Carbonell,&Ma,
2015).
1062
--- PAGE 5 ---
Learning Concept Graphs from Online Educational Data
2.1 Representation Schemes
What is the best way to represent the contents of courses to learn the universal concept
space? We explore different answers with four alternate choices as follows:
1. Word-based Representation (Word): This method uses the vocabulary of course
descriptions plus any listed keywords by the course providers (MIT, Caltech, CMU
and Princeton) as the entire concept (feature) space. We applied standard procedures
for text preprocessing, including stop-word removal, term-frequency (TF) based term
weighting, and the removal of the rare words whose training-set frequency is one.
We did not use TF-IDF weighting because the relative small number of “documents”
(courses) in our datasets do not allow reliable estimates of the IDF part.
2. Sparse Coding of Words (SCW):Thismethodprojectstheoriginaln-dimensional
vector representations of words (the columns in the course-by-word matrix X) onto
sparse vectors in a smaller k-dimensional space using Non-negative Matrix Factoriza-
tion (Lee & Seung, 1999), where k is much smaller than n. One can view the lower
dimensional components as the system-discovered latent concepts. Intrigued by the
successful application of sparse coding in image processing (Hoyer, 2004), we explored
its application to our graph-based inference problem. By applying an existing sparse
codingalgorithm(Kim&Park,2008)toourtrainingsetsweobtainedak-dimensional
vectorforeachword; bytakingtheaverageofwordvectorsineachcourseweobtained
thebag-of-conceptsrepresentationofthecourse. Thisresultedinann-by-k matrixX,
representing all the training-set courses in the k-dimensional space of latent concepts.
We set k = 100 in our experiments based on cross validation.
3. Distributed Word Embedding (DWE): This method also uses dimension-reduced
vectors to represent words in the courses, similar to SCW. However, the lower dimen-
sional vectors (continuous vector representations) for words are discovered by neural
networks based on word usage w.r.t. contextual, syntactic and semantic information
(Le & Mikolov, 2014). Intrigued by the popularity of DWE in recent research in
Natural Language Processing and other domains (Collobert, Weston, Bottou, Karlen,
Kavukcuoglu, & Kuksa, 2011; Chen, Perozzi, Al-Rfou, & Skiena, 2013), we explored
its application to our graph-based inference problem. Specifically, we deploy English
word embeddings trained on Wikipedia articles (Al-Rfou, Perozzi, & Skiena, 2013), a
domain which is believed to be semantically close to that of academic courses. The
vector representation for each course is obtained by aggregating the vector represen-
tations of words it contains.
4. Category-based Representation (Cat): This method used a large subset of
Wikipedia categories as the concept space. We selected the subset via a pooling strat-
egyasfollows: Weusedthewordsinourtraining-setcoursestoform3509queries(one
query per course), and retrieved the top 100 documents per query based on cosine
similarity. We then took the union of the Wikipedia category labels of these retrieved
documents, and removed the categories which were retrieved by only three queries or
less. This process resulted in a total of 10,051 categories in the concept space. The
categorization of courses was based on an earlier highly scalable very-large category
1063
--- PAGE 6 ---
Liu, Ma, Yang, & Carbonell
space work (Gopal & Yang, 2013): the classifiers were trained on labeled Wikipedia
articles and then applied to the word-based vector representation of each course for
(weighted) category assignments.
Each of the above representation schemes may have its own strengths and weaknesses.
Word issimpleandnaturalbutrathernoisy,becausesemanticallyequivalentlexicalvariants
are not unified into canonical concepts and there could be systematic vocabulary variation
across universities. Also, this scheme will not work in cross-language settings, e.g., if course
descriptionsareinEnglishandChinese. Cat wouldbelessnoisyandbetterincross-language
settings, but the automated classification step will unavoidably introduce errors in category
assignments. SCW (sparse coding of words) reduces the total number of model parameters
via dimensionality reduction, which may lead to robust training (avoiding overfitting) and
efficient computation, but at the risk of losing useful information in the projection from
the original high-dimensional space to a lower dimensional space. DWE (distributed word
embedding)deploysrecentadvancesindeeplearningofwordmeaningsincontext. However,
reliable word embedding requires the availability of large volumes of training text (e.g.,
Wikipedia articles); the potential mismatch between the training domain (for which large
volumesofdatacanbeobtainedeasily)andthetestdomain(forwhichlargevolumesofdata
are hard or costly to obtain) could be a serious issue. Yet another distinction among these
representation schemes is that Word and Cat produce human-understandable concepts and
links,whileSCW andDWE producelatentfactorswhicharehardertointerpretbyhumans,
although methods such as L1 regularization help with interpretability (sec 6.5).
By exploring all the four representation schemes in our unified framework for two-level
graph based inference, and by examining their effectiveness in the task of link prediction
of prerequisite relations among courses, we aim to obtain a deeper understanding of the
strengths and weaknesses of those representational choices.
2.2 The Optimization Methods
We define the problem of concept graph learning as a key partof learning-to-predict prereq-
uisite relations among courses, i.e., for the two-level statistical inference we introduced in
Section 1 with Figure 1. Given a training set of courses with a bag-of-concepts representa-
tionpercourseasarowinmatrixX,andalistofknownprerequisitelinkspercourseasarow
in matrix Y, we optimize matrix A whose elements specify both the direction (sign) and the
strength (magnitudes) of each link between concepts. We propose two new approaches to
this problem: a classification approach and a learning-to-rank approach. Both approaches
deploy the same extended versions of SVM algorithms with squared hinge loss, but the
objective functions for optimization are different. We also propose a nearest-neighbor ap-
proachforcomparison, whichpredictsthecourse-levellinks(prerequisites)withoutlearning
the concept-level links.
2.2.1 The Classification Approach (CGL.Class)
In this method, we predict the score of the prerequisite link from course i to course j as:
F = x(cid:62)Ax (1)
ij i j
1064
--- PAGE 7 ---
Learning Concept Graphs from Online Educational Data
Figure 2: The weighted connections from course i to course j via matrix A which encodes
the directed links between concepts
The intuition behind this formula is shown in Figure 2. It can be easily verified that
the quantity x(cid:62)Ax is the summation of the weights of all the paths from node i to node
i j
j in this graph, where each path is weighted using the product of the corresponding x ,
ik
A and x . In other words, we assume the prerequisite strength between two courses is
kk(cid:48) jk(cid:48)
a cumulative effect of the prerequisite strengths of all concept pairs.
The criterion for optimizing matrix A given training data x for i = 1,2,...,n and true
i
labels y for all course pairs is defined as:
ij
(cid:88)(cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:105)2 λ
min 1−y x(cid:62)Ax + (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 (2)
A∈Rp×p ij i j + 2 F
i,j
where (1−v) = max(0,1−v) denotes the hinge function, and (cid:107)·(cid:107) denotes the matrix
+ F
Frobenius norm. The 1st term in formula (2) is the empirical loss; the 2nd term is the reg-
ularization term, controlling the model complexity based on the large margin principle. We
choose to use the squared hinge loss (1−v)2 as the first term to gain first-order continuity
+
of our objective function, enabling efficient computation using accelerated gradient descent
(Nesterov, 1983, 1988) (Section 3). This efficiency improvement is crucial because we op-
erate on pairs of courses, and thus have a much larger space than in normal classification
(e.g. classifying individual courses).
2.2.2 The Learning-to-Rank Approach (CGL.Rank)
Inspired by the learning-to-rank literature (Joachims, Li, Liu, & Zhai, 2007), we explored
going beyond the binary classifier in the previous approach to one that essentially learns to
rank prerequisite preferences. Let Ω be the set of course pairs with the true labels y = 1
i ij
for different j’s, and Ω¯ the pairs of courses with the true labels y = −1 for different k’s,
i ik
we want our system to give all the pairs in Ω higher scores than that of any pair in Ω¯ . We
i i
call this the partial-order preference over links conditioned on course i.
1065
--- PAGE 8 ---
Liu, Ma, Yang, & Carbonell
Let T be the union of tuple sets {(i,j,k)|(i,j) ∈ Ω ,(i,k) ∈ Ω¯ } for all i in 1,2,...,n.
i i
We formulate our optimization problem as:
(cid:88) (cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:105)2 λ
min 1− x(cid:62)Ax −x(cid:62)Ax + (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 (3)
A∈Rp×p i j i k + 2 F
(i,j,k)∈T
Or equivalently, the objective can be rewritten as:
(cid:88)
(cid:20)
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:21)2
λ
min 1− XAX(cid:62) + XAX(cid:62) + (cid:107)A(cid:107)2 (4)
A∈Rp×p
(i,j,k)∈T
ij ik
+
2 F
Solving this optimization problem requires us to extend standard packages of SVM algo-
rithmsinordertoimprovecomputationalefficiencybecausethenumberofmodelparameters
(p2) in our formulation is very large. For example, with the vocabulary size of 15,396 words
in the MIT dataset, the number of model parameters in A is over 237 million. When p
(the number of concepts) is much larger than n (the number of courses), one may consider
solving this optimization problem in the dual space instead of the primal space. However,
even in the dual space, the number of dual variables is still O(n3), corresponding to all the
triplets in T, and the kernel matrix is in the order of O(n6). We are going to address these
computational challenges in Section 3.
2.2.3 The Nearest-Neighbor Approach (kNN)
Different from the two approaches above where matrix A plays a central role, as a different
baseline, we propose to predict the prerequisite relationship for any pair of courses based
on matrix X and Y without A. Let (i(cid:48),j(cid:48)) be a new pair of courses in the test set, we score
each course pair (i,j) in the training set with respect the new test pair as:
(cid:10) (cid:11) (cid:10) (cid:11)
x ,x × x ,x ∀i,j = 1,2,...,n (5)
i(cid:48) i j(cid:48) j
where(cid:104)·,·(cid:105)standsfortheinnerproductbetweentwovectors. Bytakingthetop-scoredpairs
in the training set and by aggregating the corresponding y ’s, we perform the kNN-based
ij
prediction of yˆ for the new test pair. If we normalize the vectors, the dot-products in (5)
i(cid:48)j(cid:48)
become the cosine similarity. This approach requires nearest-neighbor search on-demand;
when the number of course pairs in the test set is large, the online computation would be
substantial. Via cross validation, we have found k = 1 (1NN) works best for this problem
on the current datasets.
2.2.4 The Support Vector Machine (SVM)
As another baseline for comparision we also include an SVM with the following objective:
(cid:88) (cid:104) (cid:105) λ
min 1−y (x −x )(cid:62)w + (cid:107)w(cid:107)2 (6)
w∈Rp ij i j + 2 2
i,j
Similar to the kNN approach above and unlike CGL, the SVM optimization in (6) does not
involvelearningthematrixA(thedirectedgraphofuniversalconcepts). Thefeaturevector
1066