
--- PAGE 1 ---
Dang FR, Tang JT, Pang KY et al. Constructing an educational knowledge graph with concepts linked to Wikipedia.
JOURNAL OF COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 36(5): 1200–1211 Sept. 2021. DOI 10.1007/s11390-020-
0328-2
Constructing an Educational Knowledge Graph with
Concepts Linked to Wikipedia
Fu-Rong Dang1,+, Jin-Tao Tang1,+, Senior Member, CCF, Kun-Yuan Pang1
Ting Wang1,∗, Senior Member, CCF, Sha-Sha Li1, and Xiao Li2
1College of Computer Science and Technology, National University of Defense Technology, Hunan 410073, China
2Information Center, National University of Defense Technology, Hunan 410073, China
E-mail: 8mimixi8@163.com; {tangjintao, pangkunyuan, tingwang, shashali, xiaoli}@nudt.edu.cn
Received January 11, 2020; accepted August 18, 2020.
Abstract To use educational resources efficiently and dig out the nature of relations among MOOCs (massive open
onlinecourses),aknowledgegraphwasbuiltforMOOCsonfourmajorplatforms: Coursera,EDX,XuetangX,andICourse.
This paper demonstrates the whole process of educational knowledge graph construction for reference. And this knowledge
graph, the largest knowledge graph of MOOC resources at present, stores and represents five classes, 11 kinds of relations
and 52779 entities with their corresponding properties, amounting to more than 300000 triples. Notably, 24188 concepts
are extracted from text attributes of MOOCs and linked them directly with corresponding Wikipedia entries or the closest
entries calculated semantically, which provides the normalized representation of knowledge and a more precise description
for MOOCs far more than enriching words with explanatory links. Besides, prerequisites discovered by direct extractions
areviewedasanessentialsupplementtoaugmenttheconnectivityintheknowledgegraph. Thisknowledgegraphcouldbe
considered as a collection of unified MOOC resources for learners and the abundant data for researchers on MOOC-related
applications, such as prerequisites mining.
Keywords conceptextraction,educationalresource,knowledgegraph,massiveopenonlinecourse(MOOC),prerequisite
1 Introduction learners[1], because MOOCs which even have the same
name may vary in languages, subjects, levels, teaching
Recent years have witnessed the rapid develop- methods, and goals.
○
ment of MOOCs (massive open online courses) 1 , a Studies show that in the early stages of the MOOC
totally new online educational model, which provides learningprocess, thedropoutratecanbeupto91%[2].
high-qualityeducationalresourcesoftopuniversitiesto For people who fail to keep pace and have a tendency
globallearnersinamoredistributedandmoreInternet- to drop out, the main reason is that the course content
friendly format than the schooling. doesnotcomplywiththelearningneedsorthedifficulty
MOOCs are characterized by openness and auton- of the course exceeds the learner’s ability[3]. In the
omy,whichhasdistinguishingadvantagesintraditional past, prerequisites among courses were manually cre-
educational tasks such as educational resources selec- ated by experts over the decades. While free accessible
tion and learning path planning. Although it has seen MOOCs have increased steadily over the years, prereq-
significantprogress,cross-platformonlineeducationre- uisiterelationsarerequiredforonlineeducationalappli-
sourcesbringinformationoverloadandlearningtrekto cations to give effective guidance and cut the dropout
RegularPaper
RecommendedbyCCKS2019
ThisworkwassupportedbytheNationalKeyResearchandDevelopmentProgramofChinaunderGrantNo.2018YFB1004502,
andtheNationalNaturalScienceFoundationofChinaunderGrantNos.61532001,61702532and61303190.
+Contributedequallytothiswork
∗CorrespondingAuthor
○
1 https://www.bestcolleges.com/research/#reports,Sept. 2021.
©InstituteofComputingTechnology,ChineseAcademyofSciences2021
--- PAGE 2 ---
Fu-Rong Dang et al.: Educational Knowledge Graph Construction with Concepts Linked to Wikipedia 1201
rate. It serves students of varying educational back- posed a system that could extract concepts from the
grounds and is adaptable to any subjects. educationaldomainanddigouttheirrelationstobuild
Knowledge graph describes the concepts, entities an educational knowledge graph[13].
andtheirrelationsintheobjectiveworldinastructured In order to better understand the prerequisite rela-
form, and expresses the mass knowledge of the Inter- tionship among MOOC resources, a considerable num-
net into a form closer to the human cognitive way[4]. berofresearchersuseddifferentalgorithmstoinferpre-
It has recently drawn increasing interest as an effective requisite dependencies of MOOCs. Alsaad et al.[14]
approach to the generation of many intricate domains, proposed unsupervised methods to determine concept
whichalsocanfacilitateonlineeducationalresourceor- co-occurrence in the lecture transcripts. Yang et al.
ganizations across platforms much more than simple proposed the Concept-Graph-Learning (CGL) frame-
information extraction techniques. work to learn the relationship between MOOCs by in-
Ourresearchnotonlyfocusesontheconstructionof ferring concept prerequisite relations[15].
the cross-platform knowledge graph about MOOC re- Itcanbeseenthatcoursedescriptionsoftenaretoo
sourcesbutalsoproposesconceptextractionthatcould disparate structurally and semantically to compare for
fuse the knowledge for better concept retrieving and online learners with limited knowledge. Existing re-
improvelearners’experience. Tobespecific,extracting searches are concentrated on constructing knowledge
conceptsfrommaterialsinMOOCswouldhelpstudents graphstoshowhowtoorganizeresourcesinanefficient
bettergraspthemainpointsaswellassupportresearch way but not resource itself.
towards deeper analyses such as automatic labeling[5]. We aim to offer users with an informative educa-
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec- tional knowledge graph with complete resource lists
tion2describesrelatedstudiesofknowledgegraphcon- andprerequisitedependencies. Ourstudydistinguishes
struction with a focus on the MOOC domain. Sec- in reorganizing educational resources and bringing im-
tion 3 presents our certain method for the knowledge plicit knowledge out by extracting concepts to achieve
graph construction, concept extraction, and prerequi- more satisfying MOOCs learning experience.
site generation. Section 4 gives a detailed analysis for
our knowledge graph and the comparison with a topic- 3 Construction of Knowledge Graph
similar one. Section 5 concludes this paper and dis-
cusses future work. Tobuildaknowledgegraph,thefirstthingistofig-
ure out its architecture. There are two layers in the
knowledge graph, the logical layer (always represented
2 Related Work
by the ontology) and the data layer (a large number
Inrecentyears,knowledgegraphhasbecomeamain of instances)[16]. The logical layer scaffolds the know-
formforsemanticrepresentationofnetworkedinforma- ledge graph which serves refined regulations or axioms
tion to support intelligent systems. The research of to support the data layer in a normal way. In the data
knowledge graph construction has extended from the layer, knowledge is organized as the triples (“entity-
general-purpose open domain, such as DBpedia[6], to relation-entity” or “entity-property-value”) and consti-
thedomain-specificknowledgegraph,suchasfinancial, tutes a large network.
medical and educational[7–9]. In this paper, we use the top-down approach to
In the field of education, knowledge graph has been construct the knowledge graph. Simply speaking, we
extensively used for learning representation and effec- build the ontology first, and then link instances to cor-
tive evaluation. For improving adaptive learning, [10] responding entities in the ontology[17]. The building
proposesalearnerpreferencemodelbasedonSemantic process is generally divided into four modules: know-
Webandmainlyconsidersthecognitionmethod, inter- ledge modeling, knowledge acquisition, knowledge fu-
ests and learning ways; Chaplot et al. induced struc- sion, and knowledge storage[18].
tures of multiple units in a course[11]; Sun et al. used Specifically, as shown in Fig.1, the first step of our
theknowledgegraphtechnologytoexpressassociations approachisknowledgemodelingwhichbuildstheontol-
among contents for visualization[12]. Chen et al. pro- ogy with Prot´eg´e ○ 2 . The second step is knowledge ac-
○
2 Prot´eg´e is an open-source tool that assists in the construction and modification of ontologies with an intuitive user interface.
https://protege.stanford.edu/,June2020.
○
3 Neo4jwasselectedtostorethisknowledgegraphbecauseofhighreadandwriteperformance,user-friendlygraphquerylanguage
--- PAGE 3 ---
1202 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Sept. 2021, Vol.36, No.5
Ontology
Knowledge
Knowledge Modeling
Graph
Knowledge
Fusion
Knowledge
Instances Storage
Knowledge Acquisition
Fig.1. Constructionprocessoftheknowledgegraph.
quisition which retrieves data from major MOOC plat- connect classes[19].
forms. After data fusion, we accomplish the knowledge In our research, we define five interrelated classes
○
graph and store it into Neo4j graph database 3 . and their relations, including platforms, courses
(MOOCs), universities, instructors and concepts.
3.1 Knowledge Modeling
Specifically, each platform cooperates with many uni-
versitiestoprovidecourses,anduniversitiesemploylots
Knowledge modeling is to establish a conceptual
of instructors to teach various courses. Each course in-
modelofknowledgegraphfororganizinganddescribing
cludes lots of concepts to represent knowledge points.
the associations among entities and their relations.
Fig.2 shows a schematic of the ontology G we
Here we construct an ontology for the knowledge l
graphwhiletheontologyisthelogicallayerandthein- built. Classes N l are shown in circles with different
stancesbelongtothedatalayer. AknowledgegraphG colors. Therefore, instances can be distinguished eas-
iscomposedoftheontologyG l , thedatagraphG d and ily in color. Properties P l are the colored rectangles
the corresponding relation R between them. It can be which have the same color as the corresponding class.
represented as G = (G ,G ,R) and G = (N ,P ,E ). For example, “name”, “link”, and “language” are par-
l d l l l l
To be specific, N is the set of the class nodes, P rep- tial properties of courses. E is the black line between
l l l
resents properties and E is the set of relations that classes, such as universities “EMPLOY” instructors.
l
...
Concept Name Link Language Platform
INVOLVE PLAY_ON
IS_PARTNER
Course
TEACH OFFER
Instructor EMPLOY University
Fig.2. Ontologyoftheknowledgegraph.
Cypherandvisualizationofdata. https://neo4j.com/,June2020.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Fu-Rong Dang et al.: Educational Knowledge Graph Construction with Concepts Linked to Wikipedia 1203
3.2 Knowledge Acquisition information from online websites could be viewed as
a task of knowledge acquisition with semi-structured
In this subsection, we describe the knowledge ac-
data[20]. We compare the type of users, enrollment,
quisition process which serves as a key part in our
profit, reputation, the number of MOOCs, partners,
framework. Due to the diversity and complexity of
and the feedback of all platforms globally. As a result,
real-world MOOCs, it is crucial to accurately and ef-
ficientlyacquirethefactdatafromdifferentsourcesfor Coursera, EDX, XuetangX, and ICourse are selected
building a knowledge graph. As we mainly deal with as the data source[21]. The former two are English-
courseproperties,conceptsandprerequisiterelationsof basedMOOCplatformswheremostMOOCscomefrom
MOOCs, we can categorize the knowledge acquisition American and British institutes. The latter two are
process into three groups. Chinese-basedplatformsfocusingonMOOCsfromChi-
nese institutes.
3.2.1 Knowledge Acquisition from Web Information
Fig.3showsanexampleofextractingacourseentity
When students learn a MOOC, they can find the
onEDXwhoseattributesandrelationswithinstructors
course properties (e.g., title, abstract, and language)
and the university are circled in red rectangles. We
as well as relations with universities and instructors
transform these web text into structured data to save
directly from the web portal. Thus, in this category
of knowledge acquisition, we aim at directly extract- them into the knowledge graph. Here we simulate the
ing course information from MOOC platforms as well originalscreenshotandcirclepropertiesoutforahigher
as their relations with other classes. Extracting course resolution of the figure.
Name
Introduction
University
Abstract
Length
Effort
Goal Institution
Subject
Level
Language
Instructor
Mode
Price
Fig.3. InformationextractionofanexampleMOOConEDX.
--- PAGE 5 ---
1204 J. Comput. Sci. & Technol., Sept. 2021, Vol.36, No.5
3.2.2 Knowledge Acquisition from Concepts cessfully link them. In other cases, although we can-
not find exact text counterpart of concept mentions in
• Motivation to Extract Concepts. Compared with
Wikipedia,itdoesnotmeantheseconceptmentionsare
traditional higher educational courses that have lim-
invalid. Thus, we need to find these probable relevant
ited numbers of students, a MOOC may draw more
concepts.
than 100000 registrants with diverse backgrounds all
To accurately evaluate the general meaning of con-
over the world[22]. In most cases, key points presented
ceptmentions,weuseawordembeddingbasedmethod
in MOOCs are well grasped by certain students who
which embeds basic units of words and constitute a
may have the stronger understanding while they are
higher hierarchy like the phrase and named entity[30],
indigestible to other students[23]. Thus identifying key
for the measurement between Wikipedia entries and
knowledge points in MOOCs is very important.
concept mentions. We give a brief description of this
Usually, concepts or knowledge points hide in the
algorithm (see Algorithm 1).
text body of course information. It requires large
HerearerelevantvariablesinAlgorithm1: acourse
amountsofefforttoacquireandanalyzetheirrelevance
corpus is composed of n MOOCs, denoted as M =
as well as importance in a MOOC[24]. From a view of
{m },i = 1,...,n, where m is a MOOC and an ob-
i i
text mining, concept extraction focuses on extracting
ject to deal with. We assume that d is the directory
i
importantsemantickeyphraseofcoursecontent,which
(containing titles of each chapter) of m . And several
i
is similar to keyword acquisition in the traditional text
conceptmentionscouldbeextractedfromd . Thecon-
i
miningtask[25]. Toeasetheburdenofmanualkeyword
ceptmentionsetisdenotedasC. ciseachmentionind
i
annotation, automatic keywords identification has re-
and c∈C. Vector set V is trained with the Wikipedia
t
cently become a promising research direction, such as textbytheCBOWalgorithm[31]. Ourgoalistochoose
concept map from textbooks[26], concepts extraction
a proximate Wikipedia entry e for each concept men-
fromvideotranscripts[27],searchingfornewconceptsin
tion c. Concrete steps are shown in Algorithm 1.
MOOCs[28], automated categorization and extraction
We conduct a user study to rate Algorithm 1.
of concepts from titles of scientific articles[29]. Most
Based on the experiment, 90.7% of concept mentions
of these researches are unsupervised with limited guid-
exactly match the Wikipedia entries, which can be
ance.
linked straightforwardly. To calculate the accuracy of
However,unsupervisedkeywordextractionmethods links between concept mentions and semantically simi-
may not work well for MOOCs because of the lack of larWikipediaentries,werandomlysample100concept
sufficient text labels. For example, in a MOOC named mentionsnotinWikipediaentries. TwoM.Sc. students
“Data Mining Application”, keywords such as “SVM” andonePh.D.studentmajoringinsoftwareengineering
may only occur once in a video. This can be very hard are invited to judge whether the links between concept
for unsupervised methods. In this paper, we use exter- mentions and Wikipedia entries are proper. They are
nal resources such as Wikipedia to enrich text repre- askedtolabel“proper”or“improper”andlinkslabeled
sentationsothatcoreknowledgepointsinMOOCscan differently would be abandoned. After evaluation, we
be accurately identified. find the accuracy of the algorithm for concept men-
• How to Extract Concepts. Among the attributes tions which need to be calculated is 20%. The concept
of MOOCs, the directory written by instructors could mentions not in Wikipedia entries account for 9.3%.
give a comprehensive list of the domain. Besides, com- Eventually, the global accuracy rate of links between
pared with MOOCs on Coursera and EDX, nearly all concept mentions and Wikipedia entries is 92.6%.
MOOCs on ICourse and XuetangX are annotated with Fig.4 illustrates how Algorithm 1 works ○ 4 . The
their own directories. Thus, we choose the latter ones words marked in red and blue from the directory of
as data sources. “PrinciplesofManagement”inXuetangXbotharecon-
In this paper, we extract concepts from directories cept mentions. Blue ones could be linked with certain
of MOOCs and link them with Wikipedia. Generally, Wikipedia entries directly while red ones need to be
we need to generate a group of concept mentions (i.e., calculated for the nearest Wikipedia entries. Eventu-
candidateconcepts)first. Iftheseconceptmentionsare ally, each concept mention is transformed into the con-
consistent with certain Wikipedia entries, we can suc- cept with word embeddings directly or after being cal-
○
4 WeconducttheconceptextractiononlyontheChinese-basedplatformsandMOOCs. Forillustrativepurposes,thedirectory
andconceptsarewritteninEnglishandChineseinthefigure(Fig.4).
--- PAGE 6 ---
Fu-Rong Dang et al.: Educational Knowledge Graph Construction with Concepts Linked to Wikipedia 1205
Algorithm 1. LinkConceptMentionsoftheMOOCwithCertainWikipediaEntries
Input: adirectorydi,thevectortrainingsetVt,WikipediaentrysetE anditsvectorsetVe
Output: WikipedialinkedentrieswithconceptmentionsetC
1. Preprocessdi,includingsentencesegmentandstoppingwordremoving. ConceptmentionsetC isgeneratedandthe
vector-basedrepresentationisVc.
2. Setn=100,s=0.2,nisthenumberofneighborvectors,andsistheminimumneighboringdistance.
3. forc∈C do
if c∈E then
chasatotallycorrespondinglinkedentryasitself.
else
1)Afterwordsegmentonc,wordsetP isgenerated. ThenremovesinglewordsandstoppingwordsinP.
2)InitializetheneighborsetN =∅.
3)forp∈P do
a)forvt∈Vt do
Calculatethecosinesimilarity
sim(vp,vt)=cos(vp,vt)
b)Rankvt indescendingorderofsim(vp,vt)andputtopnintoN,then
N ={vt|sim(vp,vt)>s}and|N|=n
4)K-meansalgorithmsplitsN into|P|groupsdenotedasN1,N2,...,N
k
. Choosethebiggestgroupandthefinal
vector-basedpresentationofcistheaveragevectorofthegroup,then
v=average(vt), wherevt∈Nmax.
5)fore∈E do
Calculatethecosinesimilarity
sim(v)=cos(v,ve).
6)Rankeindescendingorderofsim(v)andchoosethetop1asthelinkedWikipediaentryofc.
... ...
...
Concept Mentions in the Directory Concepts and Their Vectors
Fig.4. ExampleofconceptextractionandlinkswithWikipediaentries.
culated. XuetangX) lost their meaningless directories. We ex-
For 2197 and 1644 MOOCs separately on ICourse tract and link 24188 concept mentions from other di-
and XuetangX, each directory is about hundreds of rectories with Wikipedia entries. For the knowledge
words ordinarily. After phrasing and filtering, 616 graph,thereare24188instancesandmorethan200000
MOOCs (48 MOOCs on ICourse and 568 MOOCs on relations between concepts and courses supplemented.