Vol.:(0123456789)
European Journal of Psychology of Education
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10212-022-00616-x
1 3
How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked 
to learning behaviors and gains in a complex science 
learning task?
Yingbin Zhang1  · Luc Paquette1  · Ryan S. Baker2  · Nigel Bosch3  · 
Jaclyn Ocumpaugh4 · Gautam Biswas5 
Received: 22 October 2021 / Revised: 4 March 2022 / Accepted: 27 March 2022 
© Instituto Universitário de Ciências Psicológicas, Sociais e da Vida 2022
Abstract
The feelings of difficulty and familiarity (FOD and FOF) are two types of metacognitive 
experiences. Both may influence student engagement and the application of metacogni-
tive strategies, but these relationships are not well understood, in part because many stud-
ies have relied on self-report measures of behaviors that may not accurately reflect stu-
dents’ actual behaviors. In this study, FOD and FOF were related to objective measures of 
off-task behaviors and metacognitive strategies. These measures were extracted from 88 
sixth graders’ action logs within a computer-based learning environment known as Betty’s 
Brain. Pre- and post-tests were administered to assess learning. Results reveal that high-
FOD students showed more off-task behaviors and fewer strategic behaviors than low-FOD 
students, particularly when this difference was measured in terms of the frequency (as 
opposed to proportion) of strategic behaviors. FOF was not associated with off-task behav-
iors and metacognitive strategies but emerged as a moderator in the relationship between 
FOD and learning gains. Low-FOD students learned more than high-FOD students in the 
low-FOF group, but such a difference was not found in the high-FOF group.
Keywords Feeling of difficulty · Feeling of familiarity · Metacognitive experience · 
Metacognitive strategy · Off-task behavior
 * Yingbin Zhang 
 yingbin2@illinois.edu
1 Department of Curriculum & Instruction, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1310 S 
Sixth Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA
2 Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut St, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA
3 School of Information Sciences and Department of Educational Psychology, University of Illinois 
at Urbana-Champaign, 501 E. Daniel St, IL 61820 Champaign, USA
4 Penn Center for Learning Analytics, University of Pennsylvania, 3700 Walnut St, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA
5 Department of Computer Science/ISIS, Vanderbilt University, 1025 16th Ave South, Nashville, 
TN 37212, USA

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
Introduction
Metacognitive strategies are important for effective learning in complex domains (Pin-
trich et al., 1993), specifically those requiring complex monitoring and control activities 
(Azevedo & Aleven, 2013). As researchers have worked to understand the relationship 
between metacognitive strategies and learning (Ohtani & Hisasaka, 2018; Veenman et al., 
1997), they have also sought to better understand metacognitive experiences that influence 
the use of metacognitive strategies (Flavell, 1979). In particular, researchers have identi-
fied the importance of two metacognitive experiences: the feeling of difficulty (FOD) and 
the feeling of familiarity (FOF) (Efklides et al., 1999; Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 2001; 
Malmberg et al., 2013; Whittlesea & Williams, 1998).
Studies have found that FOD and FOF may be associated with how students approach 
learning tasks, including their engagement and their use of metacognitive strategies (Beck-
mann & Goode, 2014; Patall et al., 2018; Rellinger et al., 1995; Soemer et al., 2019). Most 
of these studies have assessed engagement and metacognitive strategies use via self-report 
instruments. Self-report tools are appropriate for measuring FOD and FOF because they 
are individuals’ subjective feelings. Students are aware of their feelings and use them to 
guide the regulation of learning (Efklides, 2006, 2009). However, self-report measures of 
behaviors are more problematic, with previous research showing that self-report behaviors 
may be poorly correlated with actual behaviors (Azevedo, 2015; Craig et al., 2020). Objec-
tive measures, such as those extracted from action logs in computer-based learning envi-
ronments, may be more precise in capturing task-specific behaviors and strategies (Rovers 
et al., 2019).
Moreover, previous studies have examined the links among FOD, FOF, and learning 
behaviors during such tasks as mathematics problem-solving (Efklides et al., 1999), infor -
mation searching (Liu et  al., 2012), and informative text reading (Soemer et  al., 2019). 
However, no study has investigated these relationships in a complex science learning task.
The current study attempts to address these gaps by exploring the relationship between 
FOD, FOF, learning, and objective measures of strategic and off-task behaviors in learn-
ing  about human thermoregulation within a computer-based learning environment, Bet-
ty’s Brain (Biswas et al., 2016). Specifically, we compare concrete behavioral measures, 
as extracted from students’ action logs in Betty’s Brain, to awareness of subjective states, 
including FOD and FOF. The rest of the introduction discusses the theoretical distinctions 
and associations among metacognitive experiences, strategies, and knowledge; reviews 
studies about FOF and FOD; and presents the research questions that underpin the current 
research.
Metacognitive knowledge, strategies, and experience
Metacognition includes three facets: metacognitive knowledge, metacognitive strategies, 
and metacognitive experiences (Efklides, 2008). Metacognitive knowledge primarily refers 
to declarative knowledge and beliefs about self, cognition, and past task-processing expe-
riences. Metacognitive strategies refer to the procedural knowledge of how to regulate 
cognition. Examples are monitoring, control, and self-evaluation (Dent & Koenka, 2016). 
Finally, metacognitive experiences refer to experiences that we are consciously aware of 
while engaging in tasks. It takes the form of metacognitive feelings, metacognitive judg-
ments, and online task-specific knowledge. Metacognitive feelings, such as FOD and FOF, 

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
are the products of non-analytic and nonconscious inferential processes (Efklides, 2006). 
They reflect how learners feel they are doing while engaging in the task. Online task-spe-
cific knowledge is the knowledge of the task that we are aware of in task processing. It is 
analytic. Metacognitive judgments are judgments about learning, the demand of a task, the 
task solution, etc., which can be analytic or non-analytic.
Nelson and Narens’ (1990) two-level metacognitive system connects metacognitive 
knowledge, strategies, and experiences in a unified framework. This framework distin-
guishes between object-level processing, which describes cognition about the external 
world, and meta-level processing, or cognition about cognition. The meta-level receives 
information about the object-level via a monitoring function and sends orders to regulate 
the object-level activities via a control function. The monitoring process uses metacogni-
tive knowledge and triggers metacognitive experiences (Efklides, 2006). For example, if 
the meta-level detects an interruption in the object-level activities, learners may experience 
a feeling of difficulty. Learners then draw upon their metacognitive experiences and knowl-
edge to activate the meta-level control function (Efklides, 2008), which manifests as the 
application of cognitive skills and metacognitive strategies (Efklides, 2006).
Recently, Efklides’ (2011) metacognitive and affective model of self-regulated learning 
(MASRL) provides an account for the impact of metacognitive experiences on the applica-
tion of metacognitive strategies. In this model, cognitive, metacognitive, motivational, and 
affective factors interact during learning processes. During task processing, metacognitive 
experiences contribute to motivation and affect, which, in turn, modify the evaluation of 
prior decisions and drive behavior regulation. Metacognitive experiences may also influ-
ence the metacognitive strategy behaviors directly. Overall, as metacognitive experiences, 
FOD and FOF have meaningful theoretical relationships with learning behaviors.
Feeling of difficulty (FOD)
FOD describes the subjective feeling that arises when a learner interacts with a task that 
they are unfamiliar with, that demands heavy working memory, or that involves events 
that are discrepant with their knowledge structure (Touroutoglou & Efklides, 2010). As 
such, it is a product of the interaction among individuals’ ability, self-concept, and the task 
(Efklides & Tsiora, 2002; Efklides et al., 1998).
FOD is associated with a range of phenomena in cognition around learning. Studies 
have used FOD as a subjective measure of cognitive load and found it related to men-
tal effort appraisals, another subjective measure of cognitive load (Ayres, 2006; Schmeck 
et  al., 2015). The latter refers to the amount of mental effort investment that learners 
reported in completing a task. FOD may drive effort investment, but if FOD is extremely 
high, learners may also avoid putting effort into the task (van Gog & Paas, 2008).
Learners who report a higher FOD toward a task tend to exhibit lower situational inter -
est (Fulmer & Tulis, 2013), more negative affective experiences (Fulmer & Tulis, 2013), 
lower perceived competency (Tulis & Fulmer, 2013), and less emotional and behavioral 
engagement with the task (Patall et al., 2018). By contrast, other studies have found that 
FOD is positively associated with strategy use during recall tasks (Rellinger et al., 1995) 
and mathematics problem-solving (Efklides et al., 1999). The reason may be that FOD pro-
motes effortful and analytic information processing (Alter et al., 2007) and triggers meta-
cognitive control functions that result in the learner invoking cognitive and metacognitive 
strategies (Efklides, 2011).

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
Thus, higher FOD has been related to more disengagement in some studies (e.g., Ful-
mer & Tulis, 2013; Patall et al., 2018) but more application of learning strategies in oth-
ers (e.g., Efklides et al., 1999; Rellinger et al., 1995). This raises the question of whether 
the relationship between disengagement and strategy use is necessarily negative. Thus far, 
no study has investigated the associations among FOD, disengagement, and strategy use 
together. Moreover, the measurements of behaviors in most prior studies were self-reported 
(e.g., Patall et  al., 2018), and they may be weakly related to actual disengagement and 
strategy use (Craig et al., 2020). It is, therefore, worth examining the associations between 
FOD and behavioral measures in learning.
Feeling of familiarity (FOF)
FOF arises when the current task is closely tied to previous experiences or when partici-
pants attribute the fluency on the current task to prior experiences (Efklides, 2006; Whit-
tlesea, 1993). The current task can be an exact repetition or semantically related to prior 
tasks. FOF is not based on knowledge and distinct from the feeling of knowing (Efklides, 
2009; Kinoshita, 1997), which is the probability reported by individuals that they cannot 
retrieve a piece of information now but will be able to do it later on.
Educators have suggested that learning material should be related to students’ prior 
experiences (Merrill, 2002; Rivet & Krajcik, 2008), and that FOF may induce situational 
interest in a given task (Alexander et al., 1994; Soppe et al., 2005). Empirically, FOF was 
associated with less mind wandering during reading activities (Soemer et  al., 2019). In 
addition, English as a second language learners showed more behavioral and cognitive 
engagement on familiar oral narrative tasks than on unfamiliar tasks (Qiu & Lo, 2016).
Still, prior experience is not always beneficial (Reder et al., 2007), and familiarity can 
cause interference. For example, Beckmann and Goode (2014) found that students in a 
semantically familiar context acquired less knowledge about abstract scientific principles 
and performed worse in a subsequent task than students in a less familiar context. Further 
analyses found that the former held more a priori assumptions about the scientific princi-
ples than the latter, although they had no difference in prior knowledge. Students with more 
a priori assumptions tended to use less systematical exploration strategy during learning. 
The researchers concluded that students may form many a priori assumptions in a semanti-
cally familiar context but do not systematically test these assumptions during learning.
Likewise, Garcia-Marques and Mackie (2001) discussed what they call the familiarity-
stereotype effect, which refers to the phenomenon that FOF promotes non-analytic infor -
mation processing, while unfamiliarity induces analytic processing. This finding aligns 
with research showing that FOF increases the feeling of knowing (Reder & Ritter, 1992; 
Schwartz & Metcalfe, 1992), and when learners think they know something, they put less 
effort into studying it (Metcalfe, 2009). Indeed, Sockalingam and Schmidt’s (2013) work 
on problem-based learning found that unfamiliar problems stimulated the most questioning 
and reasoning behaviors.
To summarize, higher FOF has been related to less behavioral disengagement in some 
studies (Qiu & Lo, 2016; Soemer et al., 2019) but less analytic cognitive processing and 
strategy use in the others (Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 2001; Sockalingam & Schmidt, 
2013). Again, these findings raise the question of whether disengagement is negatively 
related to strategy use. No study has investigated the associations among FOF, disengage-
ment, and strategy use together. Moreover, the role of FOF in learning complex scientific 
phenomena is not yet understood (Beckmann & Goode, 2014).

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Current research
Self-report measures of disengagement and metacognitive strategies have been related 
to FOD and FOF (Patall et al., 2018; Qiu & Lo, 2016). It is not clear that the same pat-
terns will hold when behavioral measures of disengagement and metacognitive strate-
gies are utilized, given the differences between self-report and behavioral measures of 
these constructs (Craig et al., 2020). These relationships have also not yet been studied 
in the context of learning complex scientific phenomena. This study addresses these 
gaps in the context of learning human thermoregulation within a computer-based envi-
ronment, Betty’s Brain (Biswas et al., 2016). Students’ action logs in Betty’s Brain can 
be used to extract behavioral measures of disengagement and metacognitive strategies. 
Therefore, the first two research questions are: what are the relationships among FOD, 
FOF, and off-task behaviors as an indicator of disengagement (RQ1) and the relation-
ships among FOD, FOF, and metacognitive strategy behaviors (RQ2)?
RQ2 explores the relationships between FOD, FOF, and two different measures of 
metacognition, namely the frequency of the various types of behaviors (RQ2.1) and the 
proportion of them that can be classified as metacognitive (RQ2.2). We consider both 
frequencies and proportions because they may have different associations with FOD and 
FOF. For example, previous research (Alter et  al., 2007; Garcia-Marques & Mackie, 
2001) has found that high FOD and low FOF may be related to effortful and analytic 
cognitive processing. Meanwhile, Evans and Stanovich (2013) suggest that analytic 
processing is slower than non-analytic cognitive processing. If students with high FOD 
and low FOF have slower cognitive processing, we might expect them to execute fewer 
actions and metacognitive strategies (e.g. a lower frequency).
Likewise, we consider the proportion of each behavior type that reflects metacogni-
tion. Betty’s Brain includes six behavioral categories (e.g., reading and taking quizzes), 
five of which were subclassified as metacognitive and not metacognitive. For example, 
reading behaviors were classified as metacognitive when they were coherent with quiz 
results preceding them because the coherence suggested that the student might inten-
tionally seek relevant information to improve their understanding based on the quiz 
result (see the “Metacognitive strategies” section). This allowed us to calculate the 
proportion of each behavioral category (e.g., reading) that was metacognitive for each 
student.
Analytic cognitive processing allows learners to identify discrepancies between their 
progress and their learning goal and may trigger the application of metacognitive strate-
gies to regulate cognition (Efklides, 2011). Such processing might lead to lower fre-
quency of strategy use but a relatively high proportion of strategy use in  Betty’s Brain, 
given that students’ time on Betty’s Brain was not strictly limited. Although students 
with high FOD may conduct metacognitive strategies less frequently than those with 
low FOD due to slow cognitive processing, the two groups’ proportions of metacog-
nitive strategy behaviors may be close. Similarly, the low-FOF group’s proportion of 
metacognitive strategy behaviors may be close to the high-FOF group’s. Thus, we may 
expect no difference in the proportion of metacognitive strategy behaviors between the 
high- and low-FOD groups and between the high- and low-FOF groups, or that the dif-
ferences are larger in the frequency than in the proportion.
More off-task behaviors and fewer metacognitive strategy behaviors may impair 
learning, and empirical studies have found associations among FOD, FOF, and task 
performance in mathematics (Efklides et al., 1998; Yang et al., 2019). Thus, the third 

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
research question is (RQ3): what are the relationships among FOD, FOF, and learning 
gains (operationalized as the change between pre- and post-test scores) in learning about 
complex scientific phenomena?
It is worth noting that FOD and FOF are not mutually exclusive. For example, FOD may 
increase when the task is familiar but demands a heavy working memory load (Tourouto-
glou & Efklides, 2010). Consequently, FOD and FOF may interactively impact the learning 
process. Thus, we test the interaction between FOD and FOF on learning behaviors (in 
RQ1 and RQ2) and learning gains (in RQ3).
Methods
Betty’s Brain
Betty’s Brain is a computer-based learning environment where students learn about sci-
entific phenomena such as climate change and thermoregulation (Biswas et al., 2016). It 
uses a learning-by-teaching approach: students learn science by teaching a virtual agent 
named Betty. Teaching consists of building a causal map about the scientific phenomenon 
in which causal relationships are represented by directed causal links among concepts (see 
Fig.  1). To build this map, students have access to hypermedia resource pages on relevant 
scientific concepts (Science Book in Fig.  1). Students can evaluate their causal map by 
having Betty answer questions. By looking at Betty’s correct and incorrect answers (see 
Fig.  1), students can identify problems in their causal map (e.g., incorrect links). They 
improve their understanding and fix the problems in the map by reading relevant resource 
pages and revising the incorrect links.
There is a virtual pedagogical agent, Mr. Davis, who provides students with support for 
building the map. If the student is not making progress (e.g., “quiz score has not improved 
Fig. 1  Screenshot of viewing quiz results in  Betty’s Brain. The upper right shows the quiz questions, 
answers, and grades. The fourth question, which was answered incorrectly, was selected, and the concepts 
and links that Betty used to answer this question were highlighted

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
in the students’ last five attempts at updating their map”), Mr. Davis may prompt students 
to read resource pages containing information that could improve the causal map (e.g., 
“You should go and read the page on Heat Loss”).
In this study, students learned about human thermoregulation—the human body’s pro-
cesses when exposed to cold temperatures. Thermoregulation is a complex physiological 
phenomenon, and a basic understanding of it is essential for studying biology and biology-
related disciplines (Tansey & Johnson, 2015). The text about this topic in Betty’s Brain had 
15 pages and 1974 words, covering 13 scientific concepts and 15 causal links.
Participants and procedures
During the 2018–2019 school year, data were collected from 88 sixth graders from four 
classrooms in a southern US urban public school. The school served around 700 students in 
grades 5–8 and reported a student population that was 60% White, 25% Black, 9% Asian, 
and 5% Hispanic. Around 8% were enrolled in the free and reduced-price lunch program. 
No demographic data were collected from individual students due to privacy issues.
The study lasted 6 school days, during which time students worked individually on lap-
tops (but were often seated at tables of 4–5 students). On day 1, students spent 30–45 min 
completing a paper-based pre-test. On day 2, they received a 30-min training about how 
to use Betty’s Brain. In the next 3 days, they spent around 30 min per day teaching Betty 
about thermoregulation by constructing the causal map. On the final day, students first 
completed a metacognitive experience questionnaire and a science anxiety questionnaire 
(not included in this study), and then, a post-test. The metacognitive experience question-
naire contained items that asked about students’ FOD and FOF toward the Betty’s Brain 
unit on thermoregulation (current unit) and a unit on climate change that was completed 
1  month before the current study. As it had been 1  month after learning about climate 
change, FOD and FOF toward this unit might not be as accurate as students’ FOD and FOF 
toward the human thermoregulation unit. Thus, we did not analyze the associations among 
FOD, FOF, learning behaviors, and learning gains in the climate change unit.
Measures
Metacognitive experiences
Based on Efklides’ (2002) work, two items were used to measure FOD and FOF. Research 
has shown that the one-item measures of metacognitive experiences were consistent over 
the course of solving a task in a computer-based learning environment (Dindar et  al., 
2020). The FOD item asked students to rate “how hard was the Betty’s Brain’s unit on 
thermoregulation.”1 The choices included 1 = very easy, 2 = easy, 3 = neither, 4 = difficult, 
and 5 = very difficult. The FOF item asked students to rate “how familiar were you with the 
science concepts in the thermoregulation unit.” The choices included 1 = very unfamiliar, 
1 Readers unfamiliar with Betty’s Brain may think the question is asking the difficulty of the concept of 
thermoregulation rather than the difficulty of learning thermoregulation. However, a Betty’s Brain unit 
mainly refers to the task of building a causal map for the unit rather than the unit’s resource book. We 
believe that students considered the Betty’s Brain’s unit on thermoregulation in terms of this perspective 
because they had received training on Betty’s Brain and used the system for several days.

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
2 = unfamiliar, 3 = neither, 4 = familiar, and 5 = very familiar. It is worth highlighting that 
metacognitive experiences are subjective experiences that students are aware of (Efklides, 
2006, 2009). Thus, we argue that it is reasonable to assess students’ metacognitive experi-
ences via self-report questionnaires.
Past research has primarily used four, five, seven, or ten response categories for FOD 
and FOF items (e.g., Efklides, 2002; Efklides et al., 1999; Fulmer & Tulis, 2013; Liu et al., 
2012; Soemer et al., 2019; Touroutoglou & Efklides, 2010; Tulis & Fulmer, 2013). How -
ever, seven- and ten-point scales were mainly used in samples of older students such as 
undergraduates (Liu et  al., 2012; Touroutoglou & Efklides, 2010). Borgers et  al. (2004) 
suggested that fewer response categories may be better when the participants are children. 
Offering four or five categories rather than more may reduce the cognitive load when par -
ticipants respond to the item (Dillman et al., 2014). Thus, four or five categories may be 
appropriate for sixth graders. We chose a five-point scale rather than a four-point scale to 
allow neutral responses if students felt that the task was neither difficult nor easy or neither 
familiar nor unfamiliar.
Similar items measured FOD and FOF toward the climate change unit. Although we 
did not analyze the data in the climate change unit, the differences in FOD and FOF 
between the climate change and thermoregulation units may provide evidence about the 
validity of FOD and FOF measurements. Both units’ Flesch–Kincaid reading grade levels 
were 8.0, but students felt that the climate change unit was easier than the thermoregula-
tion unit (t = 3.38, df = 87, Cohen’s d = 0.36, p = 0.001). They felt more familiar with the 
climate change unit than the thermoregulation unit (t = 11.71, df = 87, Cohen’s d = 1.26, 
p < 0.001). The differences match our expectations as climate change is a relatively popu-
lar science topic. Young people (aged 12–25) are likely to know something about climate 
change and have interests and concerns about it (Corner et al., 2015). The concepts of cli-
mate change (e.g., carbon dioxide and greenhouse effect) may be more common than the 
concepts of human thermoregulation (e.g., cold detection and hypothalamus response) in 
modern media. Thus, the differences in FOD and FOF between the two units may provide 
evidence that the FOD and FOF items measured what they intended to measure, i.e., con-
struct validity.
Metacognitive strategies
Metacognitive strategies were inferred using coherence analysis, a process that identifies 
coherent actions (Segedy et al., 2015). Coherent actions are two ordered actions where the 
first action generates information supporting the second action. For instance, in Fig.  1, the 
quiz results could inform students that the question about the causal relation between cold 
temperature and detection was answered incorrectly. After viewing these quiz results, if 
students read the resource pages that contains information about the relationship between 
the two concepts, the viewing and the reading actions are defined as coherent. The two 
actions need not be consecutive, but their time interval is restricted to avoid coincidental 
connections. Prior research in Betty’s Brain found that students usually use information 
within 5 min of encountering the information (Segedy, 2014). The proportion of actions 
not supported by prior actions within 5 min was negatively related to map scores (the num-
ber of correct causal links minus the number of incorrect links), while the proportion of 
information that was used within 5 min was positively related to map scores and the change 
between pre-test and post-test scores (Segedy et al., 2015). Thus, we set the interval restric-
tion for the current study to 5 min.

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
To execute coherent actions, students must monitor previous cognitive activities and 
the information generated by previous activities (the first action and its results, e.g., 
viewing quiz results generated the information that the link chain between cold tem-
perature and detection was wrong). Then, they need to regulate the current behavior (the 
second action, e.g., reading resource pages about concepts involved in the link chain) 
based on the received information. Therefore, coherent actions may suggest the use of 
metacognitive strategies (Zhang et al., 2020; Segedy et al., 2015).
The Betty’s Brain system logs all of the actions a student perform along with the 
context in which they were performed. This makes it possible to evaluate whether a 
series of actions represents a coherent strategy or a more random approach. Specifically, 
we used the log files to label five types of coherent actions:
1. Coherent viewing—viewing quiz results that were semantically consistent with subse-
quent actions. This consistency suggests that students were monitoring (e.g., Dent & 
Koenka, 2016) the information they had collected and deliberately using it in subsequent 
actions (Zhang et al., 2020).
2. Coherent editing—making edits (additions, deletions, or other changes) to the causal 
map in a way that is consistent with content students had just seen in the virtual textbook 
or in one of the quizzes. This suggests that students were using control strategies (e.g., 
Dent & Koenka, 2016) to edit the concept map in accordance with the information they 
had just acquired (Zhang et al., 2020).
3. Coherent reading—reading a resource page that reflects feedback (either the quiz results 
or the comments from Mr. Davis) that the student has just received (Biswas et al., 2016). 
This suggests the student intentionally (e.g., with control) sought relevant information 
to improve their understanding based on the quiz result (Zhang et al., 2020).
4. Coherent marking—marking (an annotation feature in the causal map) in a way that 
reflects recent quiz results. This suggests that the student understood what links on their 
map were correct or incorrect and annotated them accordingly. Coherent marking might 
represent constructive monitoring behaviors because the marking action translates quiz 
results into systematic checking of the causal maps (Zhang et al., 2020).
5. Coherent feedback—receiving feedback from Mr. Davis that is consistent with subse-
quent reading actions. In other words, the student received a prompt and then read the 
resource it suggested. This variable assessed whether students took advantage of the 
feedback from the learning environment and might reflect control behaviors.
Non-coherent actions also occur in Betty’s Brain, and may be effective or ineffective. 
For example, consider a non-coherent reading action that occurs when a student reads 
a resource page that does not contain information useful for improving the causal map. 
Prior to this reading action, the causal links of this page had already been correctly 
added to the causal map. The reason that the student does this reading action may be (1) 
they fail to regulate behaviors based on the current progress and unnecessarily (perhaps 
haphazardly) read this page, or (2) they feel they do not understand the content of this 
page thoroughly and reread the page to reinforce their knowledge. The first reason sug-
gests an ineffective strategy, but the second reason may suggest a more effective strat-
egy, such as the monitoring (they were aware of insufficient understanding) and control 
strategy (they decided to reread the page). We could not distinguish these reasons based 
on the action log, so we did not analyze the efficacy of non-coherent actions.

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
For each kind of coherent action, we calculated two measures: the frequency (num-
ber) per minute and the proportion (i.e., the ratio of the number of coherent reading 
actions to the number of reading actions). We excluded actions that were too brief, 
including viewing (quiz results) actions shorter than 2 s and reading (resource pages) 
actions less than 10 s (no matter if these actions were coherent or not). These actions 
were unlikely to reflect the use of a metacognitive strategy (Segedy et al., 2015). For 
example, a very short time on viewing quiz results might indicate that students just 
skimmed the quiz results without analyzing the link’s correctness.
Off‑task behavior
We defined off-task behaviors as cases where, within a period at least 5-min long, stu-
dents did none of the following actions: (1) stay in a resource page for at least 30 s, (2) 
stay in a quiz result for at least 30 s, (3) edit a link, or (4) mark a link in Betty’s Brain. 
Off-task behaviors also included cases where students stayed in a page or quiz result for 
more than 10 min, substantially longer than the time needed to read a page or interpret 
a quiz result carefully. We calculated the proportion of time on these behaviors as a 
measure of off-task behavior: the ratio of the time on these behaviors to the total time 
on Betty’s Brain (including the off-task time). This metric was negatively related to the 
performance in  Betty’s Brain  in prior research (r  =  − 0.46; Segedy et  al., 2015). The 
proportion of off-task time has also been used as an indicator of behavioral disengage-
ment in other learning environments (Godwin et al., 2021; Henrie et al., 2015).
Knowledge tests
The pre- and post-tests assessed students’ knowledge of human thermoregulation and 
causal relationships. They were identical both in form and content. The test contained 
four causal reasoning items, eight multiple-choice items, and four short-answer items. A 
causal reasoning item consisted of a causal map, where abstract concepts (i.e., concepts 
were named X, Y, etc.) were connected unidirectionally, and a question about the map 
(e.g., If X decreases, what will happen to concept Y?). Each question had four choices: 
Y will (1) increase, (2) decrease, (3) not be affected, (4) depend on which causal rela-
tions are stronger. Multiple-choice items tested students’ knowledge of the thermoregu-
lation domain, and each had four choices. Students got one point if they answered a 
causal reasoning or multiple-choice item correctly. Short-answer items asked students 
to explain the human body’s responses to cold temperatures based on their understand-
ing of the causal relations among concepts in the domain. The correct answer to each 
item contained three to five successive causal links between a relevant set of concepts. 
A student got one point if their answers had one link the same or close to a link in the 
correct answer. The maximum possible test score was 27. Coefficient alpha was 0.60 
and 0.80 for the pre- and post-tests, respectively. Coefficient alpha was a little lower in 
the pre-test because some items were answered correctly by only a few students, caus-
ing low variances in these item scores and low correlations between these item scores 
and the overall pre-test score. In the post-test, more students gave correct answers to 
these questions, indicating learning. Thus, these questions were kept in both the pre- 
and post-tests.

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Analyses
The distributions of FOD and FOF were skewed (see Table  1). For FOD, there were few 
very easy, easy, or neither responses. For FOF, there were few very familiar, familiar, and 
neither responses. Treating these variables as continuous might therefore lead to biased 
results. Thus, we divided students’ ratings for each variable into two categories: high-FOD 
(ratings of difficult and very difficult) and low-FOD (ratings of neither, easy, and very 
easy), as well as high-FOF (ratings of neither, familiar, and very familiar) and low-FOF 
(ratings of unfamiliar and very unfamiliar). This division was based on the meaning of the 
rating options and the consideration of as much size balance across groups as possible. 
Putting neither and easy or unfamiliar options together did not mean that the neither option 
had the same valence for students as the easy and unfamiliar options. Instead, it empha-
sized that the students who selected difficult options perceived the task as more difficult 
than those selecting neither and easy options, and that students who selected neither and 
familiar options perceived the task as more familiar than the students selecting unfamiliar 
options. The division generated four groups: high-FOD and high-FOF (N = 10), high-FOD 
and low-FOF (N = 49), low-FOD and high-FOF (N = 15), as well as low-FOD and low-FOF 
(N = 14).
The normality and homogeneity assumptions of most of the response variables, such 
as the frequency of coherent actions, were violated, and groups were unbalanced in size. 
Thus, we used non-parametric tests to examine the associations among FOD, FOF, and 
the other variables. Specifically, to examine the associations between FOD, FOF, and the 
proportion of off-task time (RQ1), we conducted a robust two-way ANOVA with 10% 
trimmed means (a robust measure of means that ignores the top and bottom 10% of data; 
Wilcox, 2011). The robust test is satisfactory even when normality and homoscedasticity 
assumptions are violated (Wilcox, 2011). The robust ANOVA produces a χ 2-distributed 
test statistic, Q. The p value is calculated by comparing Q with an adjusted significance 
criterion (i.e., α value), so the degrees of freedom (df) are not reported (Mair & Wilcox, 
2020). The robust ANOVA was implemented within the WRS2 package in R (Mair & Wil-
cox, 2020).
To examine the association between FOD, FOF, and coherent actions (RQ2.1 and 
RQ2.2), we conducted a robust two-way ANOVA with 10% trimmed means for each 
coherent metric. We used the Benjamini–Hochberg correction to control the false discov -
ery rate (FDR) across multiple tests. This correction adjusts the α value rather than the p 
value, so we only marked a result as statistically significant if its p value was lower than 
the adjusted α value (the initial α was 0.05). We computed the partial omega squared sta-
tistics ( /u1D7142
p ) since this metric is recommended for the comparison of effects across analy -
ses with the same design (Lakens, 2013). It is an estimate of the proportion of response 
Table 1  The distribution of FOD and FOF
FOD/FOF Very unfa-
miliar
Unfamiliar Neither Familiar Very familiar
Very easy 1 1 1 0 0
Easy 2 5 2 2 2
Neither 2 3 3 4 1
Difficult 15 16 3 2 0
Very difficult 14 4 3 1 1

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
variables’ variances accounted for by predictors. A rule of thumb for its interpretation is 
that 0.01 ~ 0.06, 0.06 ~ 0.14, and greater than 0.14 correspond to small, medium, and large 
effects, respectively (Field, 2013).
To examine the associations between FOD, FOF, and test scores (RQ3), we con-
ducted a three-way, rank-based repeated ANOVA with the R package nparLD 2 (Noguchi 
et  al., 2012). Test time (pre and post) was the within-subject factor, and FOD and FOF 
were between-subject factors yielding four groups (high/low FOD × high/low FOF). The 
repeated ANOVA produces an ANOVA-type statistic (ATS), which can be approximated 
by the F distribution with an infinity df in the denominator (Brunner & Puri, 2001). The 
nparLD package also generates the relative treatment effect, and an increase/decrease in 
this effect between test time represents an increase/decrease in the test scores.
Results
Table  2 displays the means, standard deviations, and Kendall’s Tau correlations among raw 
variables in this study. FOD was negatively correlated with FOF. Neither were correlated 
with the proportion of off-task time. FOD was negatively correlated with four coherence 
metrics, while FOF was only positively correlated with the proportion of coherent view -
ing. FOD and FOF were not correlated with pre-test scores, and we, therefore, did not use 
pre-test scores as a covariate when examining the relationships among FOD, FOF, off-task 
behaviors, and coherent metrics.
Off‑task behavior
Figure  2 displays different groups’ proportions of off-task time. The robust ANOVA reveals 
a main effect of FOD (Q = 6.55, /u1D7142
p = 0.05, p = 0.03). High-FOD students showed a greater 
proportion of off-task time than low-FOD students. There was neither a main effect of FOF 
(Q = 1.25, /u1D7142
p = 0.00, p = 0.28) nor an interaction between FOD and FOF (Q = 0.33, /u1D7142
p = 
0.00, p = 0.55).
Coherent actions
Figures  3 and 4 display the frequency and proportion of various coherent actions. Over -
all, low-FOD groups showed greater frequency and proportion of coherent actions than 
high-FOD groups, but the differences between high-FOF and low-FOF groups were 
not consistent. The results of the robust ANOVA matched the figures, which were dis-
played in Table  3. A main effect of FOD was found on all measures of coherent actions 
(Q = 4.60 ~ 11.63, p < adjusted α), except the proportion of coherent edits (Q = 1.11, 
p = 0.30). There was no effect of FOF (Q < 2.6, p > adjusted α) or interaction between FOD 
and FOF (Q <  = 4.71, p > adjusted α) on any coherent metrics.
For coherent edits, viewing, read, and feedback, the effect sizes of FOF on the fre-
quency metric were greater than on the proportion metric. Such differences reached 
0.11 for coherent edits and 0.14 for coherent feedback. Moreover, there was a 
2 We did not use the WRS2 package because it did not offer the three-way repeated ANOVA.

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Table 2  Descriptive statistics and Kendall’s Tau correlations among raw variables
* p < α adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg correction
a F. Co. edits, the frequency of coherent edits per minute
b P. Co. edits, the proportion of coherent edits
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
1. FOD -
2. FOF  − 0.30* -
3. Off-task behavior 0.09 0.03 -
4. F. Co. edits a  − 0.19 0.06  − 0.36* -
5.F. Co. marking  − 0.21* 0.01  − 0.06 0.30* -
6. F. Co. viewing  − 0.26* 0.10  − 0.20 0.51* 0.46* -
7. F. Co. read  − 0.15  − 0.03  − 0.25* 0.33* 0.16 0.32* -
8. F. Co. feedback  − 0.24* 0.07  − 0.27* 0.50* 0.31* 0.46* 0.39* -
9. P. Co. edits b  − 0.10 0.03  − 0.12 0.33* 0.12 0.23* 0.38* 0.31* -
10. P. Co. marking  − 0.08  − 0.08 0.04 0.19 0.35* 0.38* 0.13 0.18 0.06 -
11. P. Co. viewing  − 0.22* 0.21*  − 0.19 0.30* 0.10 0.32* 0.28* 0.27* 0.08 0.01 -
12. P. Co. read  − 0.19 0.03  − 0.15 0.30* 0.26* 0.38* 0.33* 0.42* 0.10 0.32* 0.31* -
13. P. Co. feedback  − 0.16 0.03  − 0.12 0.19 0.20 0.24* 0.32* 0.57* 0.28* 0.11 0.13 0.24* -
14. Pre-test 0.03  − 0.10  − 0.20 0.19 0.20 0.14 0.03 0.19  − 0.02 0.08 0.08 0.10 0.07 -
15. Post-test  − 0.14 0.05  − 0.22* 0.40* 0.36* 0.28* 0.13 0.33* 0.16 0.24 0.11 0.21 0.20 0.34* -
Mean 3.72 2.09 0.08 0.38 0.05 0.41 0.23 0.07 0.80 0.73 0.60 0.77 0.37 4.84 8.34
SD 1.11 1.16 0.13 0.25 0.05 0.30 0.13 0.06 0.17 0.34 0.19 0.18 0.21 2.03 3.78

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
statistically significant difference in the frequency of coherent edits between high-FOD 
and low-FOD students but no difference in the proportion of coherent edits. The /u1D7142
p of 
FOF and the interaction was negligible or small on all coherent metrics and was not 
statistically significant.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Low FOD & Low FOF Low FOD & High FOFH igh FOD & Low FOFH igh FOD & High FOF
Proportion of off−task time
Fig. 2  The proportion of off-task time in different groups. Rhombuses represent the trimmed means. FOD, 
feeling of difficulty. FOF, feeling of familiarity
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Coherent edits Coherent marking Coherent viewingC oherent read Coherent feedback
Frequency per minute
Low FOD & Low FOF
Low FOD & High FOF
High FOD & Low FOF
High FOD & High FOF
Fig. 3  The frequency of coherent actions per minute in different groups. Rhombuses represent the trimmed 
means. FOD, feeling of difficulty. FOF, feeling of familiarity

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Learning
Table  4 displays the means and standard deviations of test scores and their ranks. In all 
groups, students scored higher in the post-test than in the pre-test. The non-parametric 
repeated ANOVA revealed a main effect of test time (F ATS,1,∞ = 108.71, p < 0.001) and a 
three-way interaction between FOD, FOF, and test time (F ATS,1,∞ = 5.58, p = 0.02). The 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Coherent edits Coherent markingCoherent viewingC oherent read Coherent feedback
Proportion
Low FOD & Low FOF
Low FOD & High FOF
High FOD & Low FOF
High FOD & High FOF
Fig. 4  The proportion of coherent actions in different groups. Rhombuses represent the trimmed means. 
FOD, feeling of difficulty. FOF, feeling of familiarity
Table 3  The robust ANOVA results on the frequency and proportion of coherent actions
*p < adjusted α
Measures FOD FOF Interaction
Q /u1D7142
p Q /u1D7142
p Q /u1D7142
p
Coherent edits Frequency 6.39 0.12* 1.54 0.00 4.71 0.04
Proportion 1.11 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.15 0.00
Coherent marking Frequency 5.80 0.04* 1.42 0.00 0.18 0.00
Proportion 7.33 0.04* 1.04 0.00 1.07 0.00
Coherent viewing Frequency 11.63 0.12* 1.09 0.00 2.85 0.02
Proportion 4.60 0.09* 2.60 0.01 1.03 0.00
Coherent read Frequency 7.64 0.07* 0.74 0.00 0.36 0.00
Proportion 7.72 0.05* 0.65 0.00 0.02 0.00
Coherent feedback Frequency 12.93 0.17* 0.84 0.01 0.00 0.00
Proportion 6.39 0.03* 0.37 0.00 0.81 0.00

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
main effects of FOD and FOF, as well as all two-way interactions, were not statistically 
significant (FATS,1,∞ < 1.40, p > 0.24).
Figure  5 depicts the change in relative treatment effects from the pre-test to the 
post-test, which represented learning gains. Within the high-FOF group, there was no 
difference in both pre-test and post-test scores between high-FOD and low-FOD stu-
dents. Within the low-FOF group, high-FOD and low-FOD students also had no dif-
ference in the pre-test scores, but a statistically significant difference appeared in the 
post-test scores. To further investigate the three-way interaction, we conducted a two-
way non-parametric repeated ANOVA (FOD × time) within each FOF group. The results 
showed that there was an interaction between time and FOD within the low-FOF group 
(FATS,1,∞ = 6.27, p = 0.01) but not in the high-FOF group (F ATS,1,∞ = 1.03, p = 0.31). 
Thus, within the high-FOF group, learning gains were the same across FOD ratings, but 
within the low-FOF group, low-FOD students learned more than those with high-FOD.
Table 4  The original test scores and their ranks
Mean (SD) Test scores Ranks
Pre Post Pre Post
High-FOD high-FOF 4.20 (1.55) 9.10 (4.94) 49.45 (28.07) 113.6 (39.39)
High-FOD low-FOF 4.73 (1.91) 7.41 (3.22) 60.80 (38.63) 100.23 (43.39)
Low-FOD high-FOF 5.17 (2.62) 8.90 (4.36) 66.43 (46.93) 110.70 (60.30)
Low-FOD low-FOF 4.93 (2.03) 9.93 (3.58) 60.79 (37.98) 129.36 (33.97)
Low FOF High FOF
Pre Post Pre Post
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Time
Relative treatment effect on test scores
Low FOD
High FOD
Fig. 5  The relative treatment effect on test scores with 95% confidence intervals. FOD, feeling of difficulty. 
FOF, feeling of familiarity

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Discussion
This study found that FOD was related to various aspects of the learning process, including 
off-task behaviors, coherent actions, and learning gains. FOF was not related to off-task 
behaviors and coherent actions, but it moderated the association between FOD and learn-
ing gains. In the low-FOF group, students with high-FOD learned less than the low-FOD 
students, but this pattern did not repeat within the high-FOF group.
The high-FOD group engaged in more off-task behaviors and fewer coherent actions. 
This result is in line with prior research, where participants read fewer content pages in a 
difficult information searching task than in an easy task (Liu et al., 2012). FOD is associ-
ated with disfluency and may be related to more analytic but slower task processing (Tour-
outoglou & Efklides, 2010). Thus, high-FOD students might need more time for analyzing 
collected information and executing coherent actions than low-FOD students. Moreover, 
FOD indicates cognitive load (Ayres, 2006); when perceived cognitive load is overwhelm-
ing, learners may exert little or no effort (Feldon et al., 2019). Due to exerting little effort, 
high-FOD students might engage in more off-task behaviors than low-FOD students.
High-FOD students also had a lower proportion of coherent actions than low-FOD stu-
dents. The reason for this relationship may be that FOD is associated with cognitive skills 
and self-concept (Efklides, 2006), which may impact the application of strategy to regulate 
learning (Efklides, 2011). However, the difference in the proportion of coherent action was 
smaller than in the frequency of coherent actions. The inconsistent differences between the 
proportion and frequency of coherent actions may be explained by the notion that FOD 
may trigger analytic cognitive processing (Alter et al., 2007; Efklides, 2009). Although the 
analytic processing is slow, it may alert learners to the discrepancy between progress and 
goals and trigger the application of metacognitive strategies to regulate learning (Efklides, 
2011). Therefore, for high-FOD students, experiencing FOD might mitigate the disadvan-
tage in applying metacognitive strategies caused by factors such as low cognitive skills and 
self-concept. Nevertheless, the results of this study can only serve as indirect and weak evi-
dence for the claim that FOD may trigger learners’ self-regulation (Efklides, 2009), which 
requires further examination.
In our results, FOF was not related to the proportion of off-task time and coherent action 
measures. The finding is inconsistent with prior research (Qiu & Lo, 2016; Soemer et al., 
2019). One possible reason is related to the specificity of the FOF measurement. In the 
current research, the learning material was about human thermoregulation and contained 
1,974 words and 13 scientific concepts. The FOF item asked students’ general familiarity 
with human thermoregulation rather than the 13 concepts. By contrast, in Soemer et al.’s 
(2019) study, the learning material was also text about science, but it was much shorter 
(426 words) and focused on a more limited biological system, the human lung. In Qiu and 
Lo’s study (2016), English learners completed oral narrative tasks within minutes. Exam-
ples of task topics were finding a lost item and a job. FOF in Soemer et al.’s and Qiu and 
Lo’s studies was specifically toward the task rather than a more general concept; thus, the 
measurement of FOF may be more specific in these studies than in the current research. 
Learners in the current research might recall experiences related to human thermoregula-
tion but not the 13 concepts in mind when they reported FOF. When learners with high 
FOF actually started the task, they found that they did not know the learning content. In 
this case, the familiarity-stereotyping effect would not appear because the familiarity-ste-
reotype did not fit the context (Garcia-Marques et al., 2016). This possibility is consistent 
with the dissociation between FOF and pre-test scores in the current study (see Table  2). 

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
Consequently, high-FOF students might put effort into studying and adopt more analytic 
processing like their low-FOF counterparts. It is worth noting that the lack of association 
between FOF and pre-test scores does not mean that the measure of FOF was nonreliable. 
FOF is the product of a non-analytic inferential process and based on experiences rather 
than knowledge (Whittlesea, 1993).
The inconsistent findings raise the question about how the overall FOF toward a task 
is related to FOF toward subtasks, as well as how they are differentially related to learn-
ing behaviors and gains. For instance, in Betty’s Brain, further research may examine the 
association between FOF toward single concepts and the overall FOF as well as the dif-
ference between the average FOF toward single concepts and the overall FOF. Answers to 
these questions may inform us about how FOF toward subtasks influence the formation of 
the overall FOF and how to choose the FOF measurement. Moreover, the difference in the 
associations between various FOF and learning is also critical because of practical implica-
tions. If only FOF specific toward the material can facilitate learning, teachers may need to 
demonstrate the link between learning material and students’ experiences as concretely as 
possible.
We expected that low-FOD students would learn better than high-FOD students, but this 
was only true in the low-FOF group. This result may be explained by the mere-exposure 
effect, which refers to the phenomenon that people tend to rate repeated stimuli likable 
because of familiarity (Hansen & Wänke, 2009). FOD was negatively associated with joy 
(Tornare et al., 2015) and situational interest, and positive affect decreased more among 
students with high-FOD than those with low-FOD over the task process (Fulmer & Tulis, 
2013). Within the high-FOF group, the mere-exposure effect might mitigate the undesira-
ble association between affect and FOD by maintaining student interest and positive affect, 
and thus, lead to no learning difference between low-FOD and high-FOD students.
Implications
This study’s results suggest that FOD may have extensive impacts on learning, including 
off-task and strategic behaviors and learning gains. However, these results do not imply 
that teachers should avoid difficult material. The scientific topic of human thermoregula-
tion in this study was challenging for sixth graders: 67% of students rated it as difficult or 
very difficult. Medium difficulty material, by contrast, may motivate students (Lupo et al., 
2019). Moreover, instead of avoiding difficult material, it is crucial to provide cognitive and 
metacognitive scaffolding to students because such support may mitigate students’ FOD 
toward challenging material (Efklides, 2006). For example, guiding students to set realistic 
goals may decrease FOD (Guthrie et al., 2013). In Betty’s Brain, this may be achieved by 
supporting students in decomposing the map building task into small subtasks.
This study’s findings support the notion that learning material should be linked to 
students’ prior experiences (Rivet & Krajcik, 2008). FOF was not related to any learn-
ing behavior metric, but it moderated the relationship between FOD and learning gains. In 
cases where students lack relevant experiences, teachers may use educational technologies, 
such as computer-based simulations (D’ Angelo et al., 2014; Winn et al., 2006), to familiar-
ize students with the topic before studying the exact content. Nevertheless, some unfamili-
arity can be helpful. For instance, unfamiliarity may suppress heuristic and non-analytic 
information processing via eliminating the familiarity-stereotype effect (Garcia-Marques & 
Mackie, 2001) and trigger advanced cognitive activities, such as questioning and reasoning 

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
(Sockalingam & Schmidt, 2013). Thus, students’ prior experiences and FOF need to be 
carefully considered while designing learning tasks.
Overall, this study highlights the role of metacognitive experiences in the learning 
process. Metacognitive knowledge and strategies have been receiving considerable atten-
tion, but metacognitive experiences are relatively underexplored. Although this study only 
investigated the association between metacognitive experiences and behaviors, these expe-
riences also interact with affect and motivation (Efklides, 2009). Examining the interac-
tions among metacognitive experiences, behaviors, affect, and motivation will generate a 
comprehensive understanding of metacognitive experiences in learning.
Limitation and further research
FOF and FOD were retrospective in this study. Thus, no causal effect between them and 
learning behaviors can be concluded from the data available. Further studies may, for 
instance, present tasks with different difficulty levels to the same individuals and meas-
ure both prospective and retrospective FOD toward each task. At the student-level, testing 
the associations between prospective FOD and learning behaviors examines whether FOD 
influences learning behaviors. At the task-level, whether individuals apply metacognitive 
strategies differently when FOD differs provides understanding about the within-students 
variability in the application of metacognitive strategies across different FOD levels (also 
see Malmberg et al., 2016).
We operationalized metacognitive strategy use by analyzing the coherence of student 
actions within Betty’s Brain. This definition is conceptually reasonable, since prior stud-
ies have found meaningful links between coherent actions, learning, and affect (Zhang 
et al., 2020; Segedy et al., 2015), but it is worth further investigating the reliability and 
validity of such definition by triangulating our findings with other methods. For example, 
future research could use well-established frameworks to collect and code think-aloud data 
in terms of SRL strategies (Azevedo & Cromley, 2004). In particular, we could use this 
method to investigate what SRL strategies students’ report (via think-aloud) when they 
execute coherent actions. Understanding the links between coherent actions and SRL strat-
egies may allow finer-grained analyses and enrich the theory of micro-level SRL process 
(Molenaar, 2014). Moreover, interviews targeted on coherent actions may be conducted 
in situ to reveal what students are thinking when they execute coherent actions. Thus far, 
coherence analyses have been limited to Betty’s Brain and CTSiM, a computer-based envi-
ronment for learning scientific phenomena, computational concepts, and practices (Zhang 
et al., 2021). The extent to which this approach applies to other contexts, such as intelligent 
tutoring systems and educational games, awaits further investigation.
It may be valuable to measure metacognitive experiences at different time points over 
the course of learning and examine their dynamic association with behaviors. Results from 
such analyses may enrich micro-level self-regulated learning theories (Molenaar, 2014). 
Researchers may measure metacognitive experiences via the daily diary approach or 
momentary time sampling (Gunthert & Wenze, 2012; Meany Daboul et al., 2007), depend-
ing on the length of the task and the granularity of interest. Since having students report 
metacognitive experiences frequently may intervene learning, a less invasive approach 
will be helpful. For instance, FOD is associated with some verbal and nonverbal indica-
tors, such as utterance denoting inability to solve the task and frowning (Efklides, 2016). 
Researchers may collect these data and apply machine learning to build automatic detec-
tors of metacognitive experiences (see, for instance, Ching-En, 2018).

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
In the current study, FOD and FOF were each measured by one item with five options. 
This one-item measurement has been used in most prior studies about metacognitive expe-
riences (e.g., Dindar et al., 2020; Efklides, 2002), but it lowers reliability and limits the 
range of FOD and FOF to five values. Such a small range might cause failure in identifying 
the optimal FOD, which is analogous to the optimal task difficulty (Malmberg et al., 2013), 
and optimal FOF. At the optimal level, the benefits of FOD and FOF may be maximized, 
while their undesirable effects may be minimized. Further research may explore the opti-
mal metacognitive experiences by capturing these constructs in a fine-grained fashion.
Conclusion
This study investigated the role of FOD and FOF in learning a complex scientific phe-
nomenon, human thermoregulation, within a computer-based environment. It found that 
students with high FOD demonstrated more off-task behaviors and less strategic behaviors 
than those with low FOD. However, the difference between the two groups was larger in 
terms of the frequency of strategic behaviors than its proportion. FOF was related to nei-
ther off-task behaviors nor strategic behaviors, but it moderated the association between 
FOD and learning. In the low-FOF group, students with low FOD learned more than those 
with high FOD, but this effect did not exist in the high-FOF group.
Acknowledgements We thank Anabil Munshi for his help in preprocessing the data and Stefan Slater for his 
helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
Author contribution Yingbin Zhang—conceptualization, methodology, formal analysis, writing (original 
draft preparation, review, and editing). Luc Paquette—conceptualization, methodology, writing (review and 
editing), supervision. Ryan S. Baker—methodology, writing (review and editing). Nigel Bosch—method-
ology, writing (review and editing). Jaclyn Ocumpaugh—methodology, investigation, writing (review and 
editing). Gautam Biswas—methodology, resources, writing (review and editing).
Funding This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grant numbers 1561676) and the 
China Scholarship Council (grant numbers 201806040180).
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.
References
Alexander, P. A., Kulikowich, J. M., & Jetton, T. L. (1994). The role of subject-matter knowledge and inter-
est in the processing of linear and nonlinear texts. Review of Educational Research, 64(2), 201–252. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 3102/ 00346 54306 40022 01
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Eyre, R. N. (2007). Overcoming intuition: Metacognitive 
difficulty activates analytic reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136(4), 569–
576. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0096- 3445. 136.4. 569
Ayres, P. (2006). Using subjective measures to detect variations of intrinsic cognitive load within problems. 
Learning and Instruction, 16(5), 389–400. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. learn instr uc. 2006. 09. 001
Azevedo, R. (2015). Defining and measuring engagement and learning in science: Conceptual, theoreti-
cal, methodological, and analytical issues. Educational Psychologist, 50(1), 84–94. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1080/ 00461 520. 2015. 10040 69
Azevedo R., Aleven V. (2013) Metacognition and learning technologies: An overview of current inter -
disciplinary research. In Azevedo R. & Aleven V. (Eds), International handbook of metacognition 

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
and learning technologies (pp. 1–16). New York, NY: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/  
978-1- 4419- 5546-3_1
Azevedo, R., & Cromley, J. G. (2004). Does training on self-regulated learning facilitate students’ learn-
ing with hypermedia? Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(3), 523–535. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 
0022- 0663. 96.3. 523
Azevedo, R., Harley, J., Trevors, G., Duffy, M., Feyzi-Behnagh, R., Bouchet, F., & Landis, R. (2013). 
Using trace data to examine the complex roles of cognitive, metacognitive, and emotional self-
regulatory processes during learning with multi-agent systems. In R. Azevedo & V. Aleven (Eds.), 
International handbook of metacognition and learning technologies (pp. 427–449). Springer New 
York. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 4419- 5546-3_ 28
Beckmann, J. F., & Goode, N. (2014). The benefit of being naïve and knowing it: The unfavourable 
impact of perceived context familiarity on learning in complex problem solving tasks. Instructional 
Science, 42(2), 271–290. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11251- 013- 9280-7
Biswas, G., Segedy, J. R., & Bunchongchit, K. (2016). From design to implementation to practice a 
learning by teaching system: Betty’s brain. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Edu-
cation, 26(1), 350–364. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40593- 015- 0057-9
Borgers, N., Sikkel, D., & Hox, J. (2004). Response effects in surveys on children and adolescents: The 
effect of number of response options, negative wording, and neutral mid-point. Quality & Quantity,  
38(1), 17–33. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1023/B: QUQU. 00000 13236. 29205. a6
Brunner, E., & Puri, M. L. (2001). Non-parametric methods in factorial designs. Statistical Papers,  
42(1), 1–52. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s0036 20000 039
Ching-En, C. (2018). Metacognitive experience modeling using eye-tracking. In Penstein Rosé C. et al. 
(Eds), Artificial Intelligence in Education. AIED 2018. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol 
10948 (pp. 503–507). Cham, Germany: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-3- 319- 93846-2_ 94
Craig, K., Hale, D., Grainger, C., & Stewart, M. E. (2020). Evaluating metacognitive self-reports: Sys-
tematic reviews of the value of self-report in metacognitive research. Metacognition and Learning,  
15, 155–213. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11409- 020- 09222-y
D’ Angelo, C., Rutstein, D., Harris, C., Bernard, R., Borokhovski, E., ... Haertel, G. (2014). Simulations 
for STEM learning: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International.
Dent, A. L., & Koenka, A. C. (2016). The relation between self-regulated learning and academic 
achievement across childhood and adolescence: A meta-analysis. Educational Psychology Review,  
28(3), 425–474. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10648- 015- 9320-8
Dillman, D. A., Smyth, J. D., & Christian, L. M. (2014). Internet, phone, mail, and mixed mode surveys: 
The tailored design method (4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Dindar, M., Järvelä, S., & Järvenoja, H. (2020). Interplay of metacognitive experiences and performance 
in collaborative problem solving. Computers and Education, 154, Article 103922. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. compe du. 2020. 103922
Efklides, A. (2002). Feelings and judgments as subjective evaluations of cognitive processing: How reli-
able are they? Psychology: The Journal of the Hellenic Psychological Society, 9(2), 163–184.
Efklides, A. (2006). Metacognition and affect: What can metacognitive experiences tell us about the 
learning process? Educational Research Review, 1(1), 3–14. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. edurev. 2005. 
11. 001
Efklides, A. (2008). Metacognition: Defining its facets and levels of functioning in relation to self-reg-
ulation and co-regulation. European Psychologist, 13(4), 277–287. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1027/ 1016- 
9040. 13.4. 277
Efklides, A. (2009). The role of metacognitive experiences in the learning process. Psicothema, 21(1), 
76–82.
Efklides, A. (2011). Interactions of metacognition with motivation and affect in self-regulated learn-
ing: The MASRL model. Educational Psychologist, 46(1), 6–25. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00461 520. 
2011. 538645
Efklides, A. (2016). Metamemory and affect. In J. Dunlosky & S. U. K. Tauber (Eds.), The Oxford hand-
book of metamemory. (pp. 245–267). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1093/ oxfor dhb/ 97801 99336 746. 013.1
Efklides, A., Kourkoulou, A., Mitsiou, F., & Ziliaskopoulou, D. (2006). Metacognitive knowledge of 
effort, personality factors, and mood state: Their relationships with effort-related metacognitive 
experiences. Metacognition and Learning, 1(1), 33–49. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11409- 006- 6581-0
Efklides, A., Papadaki, M., Papantoniou, G., & Kiosseoglou, G. (1998). Individual differences in feel-
ings of difficulty: The case of school mathematics. European Journal of Psychology of Education,  
13(2), 207–226. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF031 73090

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
Efklides, A., Samara, A., & Petropoulou, M. (1999). Feeling of difficulty: An aspect of monitoring that 
influences control. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14(4), 461–476. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ BF031 72973
Efklides, A., & Tsiora, A. (2002). Metacognitive experiences, self-concept, and self-regulation. Psycho-
logia, 45(4), 222–236. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2117/ psysoc. 2002. 222
Evans, J. S. B. T., & Stanovich, K. E. (2013). Dual-process theories of higher cognition. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 8(3), 223–241. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 17456 91612 460685
Feldon, D. F., Callan, G., Juth, S., & Jeong, S. (2019). Cognitive load as motivational cost. Educational 
Psychology Review, 31(2), 319–337. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10648- 019- 09464-6
Field, A. (2013). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics (4th ed.). SAGE.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive–developmental 
inquiry. American Psychologist, 34(10), 906–911. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0003- 066X. 34. 10. 906
Fulmer, S. M., & Tulis, M. (2013). Changes in interest and affect during a difficult reading task: Rela-
tionships with perceived difficulty and reading fluency. Learning and Instruction, 27, 11–20. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. learn instr uc. 2013. 02. 001
Garcia-Marques, T., Mackie, D. M., Maitner, A. T., & Claypool, H. M. (2016). Moderation of the famil-
iarity-stereotyping effect: The role of stereotype fit. Social Cognition, 34(2), 81–96. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1521/ soco. 2016. 34.2. 81
Garcia-Marques, T., & Mackie, D. M. (2001). The feeling of familiarity as a regulator of persuasive pro-
cessing. Social Cognition, 19(1), 9–34. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1521/ soco. 19.1. 9. 18959
KE Godwin H Seltman M Almeda M Davis Skerbetz S Kai RS Baker AV Fisher 2021 The elusive 
relationship between time on-task and learning: Not simply an issue of measurement Educational 
Psychology 1–18 https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01443 410. 2021. 18943 24
Gunthert, K. C., & Wenze, S. J. (2012). Daily diary methods. In M. R. Mehl & T. S. Conner (Eds.), 
Handbook of research methods for studying daily life (pp. 144–159). The Guilford Press.
Guthrie, J. T., Klauda, S. L., & Ho, A. N. (2013). Modeling the relationships among reading instruction, 
motivation, engagement, and achievement for adolescents. Reading Research Quarterly, 48(1), 
9–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ rrq. 035
Hansen, J., & Wänke, M. (2009). Liking what’s familiar: The importance of unconscious familiarity 
in the mere-exposure effect. Social Cognition, 27(2), 161–182. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1521/ soco. 2009. 
27.2. 161
Henrie, C. R., Halverson, L. R., & Graham, C. R. (2015). Measuring student engagement in technol-
ogy-mediated learning: A review. Computers and Education, 90, 36–53. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
compe du. 2015. 09. 005
Kinoshita, S. (1997). Masked target priming effects on feeling-of-knowing and feeling-of-familiarity 
judgments. Acta Psychologica, 97(2), 183–199. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0001- 6918(97) 00018-8
Lakens, D. (2013). Calculating and reporting effect sizes to facilitate cumulative science: A practical 
primer for t-tests and ANOVAs. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, Article 863. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ 
fpsyg. 2013. 00863
Liu, C., Liu, J., Cole, M., Belkin, N. J., & Zhang, X. (2012). Task difficulty and domain knowledge 
effects on information search behaviors. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence and Technology, 49(1), 1–10. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ meet. 14504 901142
Lupo, S. M., Strong, J. Z., & Conradi Smith, K. (2019). Struggle is not a bad word: Misconceptions and 
recommendations about readers struggling with difficult texts. Journal of Adolescent and Adult Lit-
eracy, 62(5), 551–560. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ jaal. 926
Mair, P., & Wilcox, R. (2020). Robust statistical methods in R using the WRS2 package. Behavior 
Research Methods, 52(2), 464–488. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3758/ s13428- 019- 01246-w
Malmberg, L., Lim, W. H., Tolvanen, A., & Nurmi, J. (2016). Within-students variability in learning 
experiences, and teachers’ perceptions of students’ task-focus. Frontline Learning Research, 4(5), 
62–82. https:// doi. org/ 10. 14786/ flr. v4i5. 227
Malmberg, L., Walls, T. A., Martin, A. J., Little, T. D., & Lim, W. H. (2013). Primary school students’ 
learning experiences of, and self-beliefs about competence, effort, and difficulty: Random effects mod-
els. Learning and Individual Differences, 28, 54–65. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lindif. 2013. 09. 007
Meany Daboul, M. G., Roscoe, E. M., Bourret, J. C., & Ahearn, W. H. (2007). A comparison of momen-
tary time sampling and partial-interval recording for evaluating functional relations. Journal of 
Applied Behavior Analysis, 40(3), 501–514. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1901/ jaba. 2007. 40- 501
Merrill, M. D. (2002). First principles of instruction. Educational Technology Research and Develop-
ment, 50(3), 43–59. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ BF025 05024
Metcalfe, J. (2009). Metacognitive judgments and control of study. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 18(3), 159–163. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1467- 8721. 2009. 01628.x

---PAGE---

How are feelings of difficulty and familiarity linked to learning…
1 3
Molenaar, I. (2014). Advances in temporal analysis in learning and instruction. Frontline Learning 
Research, 2(4), 15–24. https:// doi. org/ 10. 14786/ flr. v2i4. 118
Nelson, T. O., & Narens, L. (1990). Metamemory: A theoretical framework and new findings. Psychology of 
Learning and Motivation, 26, 125–173. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0079- 7421(08) 60053-5
Noguchi, K., Gel, Y. R., Brunner, E., & Konietschke, F. (2012). nparLD: An R software package for the 
non-parametric analysis of longitudinal data in factorial experiments. Journal of Statistical Software, 
50(12), 1–23. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18637/ jss. v050. i12
Ohtani, K., & Hisasaka, T. (2018). Beyond intelligence: A meta-analytic review of the relationship among 
metacognition, intelligence, and academic performance. Metacognition and Learning, 13(2), 179–212. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11409- 018- 9183-8
Patall, E. A., Hooper, S., Vasquez, A. C., Pituch, K. A., & Steingut, R. R. (2018). Science class is too hard: 
Perceived difficulty, disengagement, and the role of teacher autonomy support from a daily diary per -
spective. Learning and Instruction, 58, 220–231. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. learn instr uc. 2018. 07. 004
Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D. A., Garcia, T., & McKeachie, W. J. (1993). Reliability and predictive validity of 
the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire (MSLQ). Educational and Psychological Measure-
ment, 53(3), 801–813. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 00131 64493 05300 3024
Qiu, X., & Lo, Y. Y. (2016). Content familiarity, task repetition and Chinese EFL learners’ engagement 
in second language use. Language Teaching Research, 21(6), 681–698. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1177/ 13621 
68816 684368
Reder, L. M., Paynter, C., Diana, R. A., Ngiam, J., & Dickison, D. (2007). Experience is a double-edged 
sword: A computational model of the encoding/retrieval trade-off with familiarity. In A. S. Benjamin 
& B. H. Ross (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Vol. 48. Skill and strategy in memory 
use (pp. 271–312). Elsevier Academic Press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0079- 7421(07) 48007-0
Reder, L. M., & Ritter, F. E. (1992). What determines initial feeling of knowing? Familiarity with question 
terms, not with the answer. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 
18(3), 435–451. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0278- 7393. 18.3. 435
Rellinger, E., Borkowski, J. G., Turner, L. A., & Hale, C. A. (1995). Perceived task difficulty and intelli-
gence: Determinants of strategy use and recall. Intelligence, 20(2), 125–143. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 
0160- 2896(95) 90029-2
Rivet, A. E., & Krajcik, J. S. (2008). Contextualizing instruction: Leveraging students’ prior knowledge and 
experiences to foster understanding of middle school science. Journal of Research in Science Teach-
ing, 45(1), 79–100. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ tea. 20203
Rovers, S. F. E., Clarebout, G., Savelberg, H. H. C. M., de Bruin, A. B. H., & van Merriënboer, J. J. G. 
(2019). Granularity matters: Comparing different ways of measuring self-regulated learning. Metacog-
nition and Learning, 14(1), 1–19. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11409- 019- 09188-6
Schmeck, A., Opfermann, M., van Gog, T., Paas, F., & Leutner, D. (2015). Measuring cognitive load with 
subjective rating scales during problem solving: Differences between immediate and delayed ratings. 
Instructional Science, 43(1), 93–114. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11251- 014- 9328-3
Schwartz, B. L., & Metcalfe, J. (1992). Cue familiarity but not target retrievability enhances feeling-of-
knowing judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18(5), 
1074–1083. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0278- 7393. 18.5. 1074
Segedy, J. R. (2014). Adaptive Scaffolds in Open-Ended Computer-Based Learning Environments (Order 
No. 3674132). [Doctoral dissertation, Vanderbilt University]. ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global.
Segedy, J. R., Kinnebrew, J. S., & Biswas, G. (2015). Using coherence analysis to characterize self-regu-
lated learning behaviours in open-ended learning environments. Journal of Learning Analytics, 2(1), 
13–48. https:// doi. org/ 10. 18608/ jla. 2015. 21.3
Sockalingam, N., & Schmidt, H. G. (2013). Does the extent of problem familiarity influence students’ 
learning in problem-based learning? Instructional Science, 41(5), 921–932. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s11251- 012- 9260-3
Soemer, A., Idsardi, H. M., Minnaert, A., & Schiefele, U. (2019). Mind wandering and reading comprehen-
sion in secondary school children. Learning and Individual Differences, 75, Article 101778. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lindif. 2019. 101778
Soppe, M., Schmidt, H. G., & Bruysten, R. J. M. P. (2005). Influence of problem familiarity on learn-
ing in a problem-based course. Instructional Science, 33(3), 271–281. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 
s11251- 004- 7688-9
Tansey, E. A., & Johnson, C. D. (2015). Recent advances in thermoregulation. Advances in Physiology Edu-
cation, 39(3), 139–148. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1152/ advan. 00126. 2014
Tornare, E., Czajkowski, N. O., & Pons, F. (2015). Children’s emotions in math problem solving situations: 
Contributions of self-concept, metacognitive experiences, and performance. Learning and Instruction, 
39, 88–96. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. learn instr uc. 2015. 05. 011

---PAGE---

 Y. Zhang et al.
1 3
Touroutoglou, A., & Efklides, A. (2010). Cognitive interruption as an object of metacognitive monitoring: 
Feeling of difficulty and surprise. In A. Efklides & P. Misailidi (Eds.), Trends and prospects in meta-
cognition research (pp. 171–208). Boston: Springer. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ 978-1- 4419- 6546-2_9
Tulis, M., & Fulmer, S. M. (2013). Students’ motivational and emotional experiences and their relationship 
to persistence during academic challenge in mathematics and reading. Learning and Individual Differ -
ences, 27, 35–46. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lindif. 2013. 06. 003
van Gog, T., & Paas, F. (2008). Instructional efficiency: Revisiting the original construct in educational 
research. Educational Psychologist, 43(1), 16–26. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 00461 52070 17562 48
Veenman, M. V. J., Elshout, J. J., & Meijer, J. (1997). The generality vs domain-specificity of metacognitive 
skills in novice learning across domains. Learning and Instruction, 7(2), 187–209. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ S0959- 4752(96) 00025-4
Whittlesea, B. W. A. (1993). Illusions of familiarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 19(6), 1235–1253. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1037/ 0278- 7393. 19.6. 1235
Whittlesea, B. W., & Williams, L. D. (1998). Why do strangers feel familiar, but friends don’t? A discrep-
ancy-attribution account of feelings of familiarity. Acta Psychologica, 98(2–3), 141–165. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 1016/ S0001- 6918(97) 00040-1
Wilcox, R. R. (2011). Introduction to robust estimation and hypothesis testing (3rd ed). San Diego, CA: 
Academic press. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ B978-0- 12- 804733- 0. 00014-7
Winn, W., Stahr, F., Sarason, C., Fruland, R., & Oppenheimer, P.,... Lee, Y. L. (2006). Learning oceanogra-
phy from a computer simulation compared with direct experience at sea. Journal of Research in Sci-
ence Teaching, 43(1), 25–42. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ tea. 20097
Yang, Z., Barnard-Brak, L., & Lan, W. Y. (2019). Examining the association of over-claiming with math-
ematics achievement. Learning and Individual Differences, 70, 30–38. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. lindif. 
2019. 01. 004
Zhang, N., Biswas, G., & Hutchins, N. (2021). Measuring and analyzing students’ strategic learning behav-
iors in open-ended learning environments. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s40593- 021- 00275-x
Zhang, Y., Paquette, L., Baker, R. S., Ocumpaugh, J., Bosch, N., Munshi, A., & Biswas, G. (2020). The 
relationship between confusion and metacognitive strategies in Betty’s Brain. In C. Rensing & H. 
Drachsler (Eds.), Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowl-
edge (pp. 276–284). Association for Computing Machinery. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1145/ 33754 62. 33755 18
Luc Paquette. Department of Curriculum & Instruction, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1310 
S Sixth Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA. ORCID: 0000-0002-2738-3190.
Yingbin Zhang. Department of Curriculum & Instruction, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 1310 S 
Sixth Street, Champaign, IL 61820, USA. E-mail: yingbin2@illinois.edu. ORCID: 0000-0002-2664-3093. 
Current themes of research: 
Our current themes of research are students’ self-regulated learning processes during science learning 
within open-ended environments. Specifically, we focus on the interactions among behaviors, affect, 
and motivation. 
Most relevant publications in the field of Psychology of Education: 
Paquette, L., Grant, T., Zhang, Y., Biswas, G., & Baker, R. (2021). Using epistemic networks to analyze self-reg-
ulated learning in an open-ended problem-solving environment. In Ruis A.R., Lee S.B. (eds), Advances in 
Quantitative Ethnography. ICQE 2021. Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 1312 
(pp. 185–201).Cham: Springer. https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-030-67788-6_13#citeas.
Zhang, Y., Paquette, L., Baker, R. S., Ocumpaugh, J., Bosch, N., Munshi, A., & Biswas, G. (2020).The rela-
tionship between confusion and metacognitive strategies in Betty’s Brain. In Rensing, C. & Drachsler, 
H. (Eds), Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Learning Analytics & Knowledge 
(LAK’20) (pp. 276–284). New York, NY: ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3375462.3375518.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.