ARTICLE
Investigating the reliability of aggregate measurements of
learning process data: From theory to practice
Yingbin Zhang 1 | Yafei Ye 2 | Luc Paquette 3 | Yibo Wang 4 | Xiaoyong Hu 1,5
1Institute of Artificial Intelligence in Education,
South China Normal University, Guangzhou,
China
2School of International Studies, Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China
3Department of Curriculum and Instruction,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA
4Department of Psychological and
Quantitative Foundations, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA
5School of Information Technology in
Education, South China Normal University,
Guangzhou, China
Correspondence
Yingbin Zhang, Institute of Artificial
Intelligence in Education, South China Normal
University, No.55 West of Zhongshan Avenue,
Tianhe District, Guangzhou City, Guangdong
510631, China.
Email:
zyingbin@m.scnu.edu.cn
Funding information
National Science Foundation, Grant/Award
Number: 1942962
Abstract
Background: Learning analytics (LA) research often aggregates learning process data
to extract measurements indicating constructs of interest. However, the warranty
that such aggregation will produce reliable measurements has not been explicitly
examined. The reliability evidence of aggregate measurements has rarely been
reported, leaving an implicit assumption that such measurements are free of errors.
Objectives: This study addresses these gaps by investigating the psychometric pros
and cons of aggregate measurements.
Methods: This study proposes a framework for aggregating process data, which
includes the conditions where aggregation is appropriate, and a guideline for select-
ing the proper reliability evidence and the computing procedure. We support and
demonstrate the framework by analysing undergraduates' academic procrastination
and programming proficiency in an introductory computer science course.
Results and Conclusion: Aggregation over a period is acceptable and may improve
measurement reliability only if the construct of interest is stable during the period.
Otherwise, aggregation may mask meaningful changes in behaviours and should be
avoided. While selecting the type of reliability evidence, a critical question is whether
process data can be regarded as repeated measurements. Another question is
whether the lengths of processes are unequal and individual events are unreliable. If
the answer to the second question is no, segmenting each process into a fixed num-
ber of bins assists in computing the reliability coefficient.
Major Takeaways: The proposed framework can be a general guideline for aggregat-
ing process data in LA research. Researchers should check and report the reliability
evidence for aggregate measurements before the ensuing interpretation.
KEYWORDS
aggregation, internal consistency, learning analytics, learning process data, test –retest reliability
1 | INTRODUCTION
Learning analytics (LA) research has aggregated process data to extract
measurements (or features) as indicators of constructs of interest to
make sense and support students' engagement and self-regulated learn-
ing behaviours (Gray & Bergner,
2022; Munshi et al., 2023;S a q r&
L/C19opez-Pernas, 2021). For instance, LA dashboards may visualize the
aggregate measurements to assist self-monitoring and facilitate reflec-
tion (Schwendimann et al., 2017). The measurements may serve as the
input of machine learning models for detecting engagement and affect
or predicting learning outcomes (Cui et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2018).
Clustering algorithms may use the measurements to group learners
because the measurements characterize learning behaviours and strate-
gies (Fincham et al.,
2018;J o v a n o v i/C19c et al., 2017).
Received: 14 May 2023 Revised: 17 January 2024 Accepted: 21 January 2024
DOI: 10.1111/jcal.12951
J Comput Assist Learn. 2024;40:1295–1308. wileyonlinelibrary.com/journal/jcal © 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 1295

---PAGE---

Aggregating process data is a common practice in LA because raw
process data may be difficult to understand due to their complexity
and size. Despite its wholesale application, the psychometric rationale
of such aggregation has not been explicitly considered. Winne (
2020)
states that the granularity of aggregate measurements should be nei-
ther too fine to cause unreliable individual differences nor too coarse
to mask within-subject variances. Building on this statement, this
paper examines the pros and cons of aggregation in terms of psycho-
metrics and proposes caveats for aggregating process data.
Additionally, the validity and reliability evidence of aggregate mea-
surements is rarely reported in LA research. Researchers have started
investigating the validity issue of measurements in LA and recom-
mended methods to improve the validity, such as grounding the mea-
surements in theories, data triangulation, and combining data-driven and
theory-driven approaches (Fan, van der Graaf, et al.,
2022;M o t z
et al., 2019;W i n n e ,2020). In contrast, the reliability issue is more
underexplored, but the reliability of measurements is as important as its
validity. Measurements with poor reliability may decrease the statistical
power and increase the false discovery rate in group difference analyses
and correlation analyses (Parsons et al.,
2019). Ignoring the reliability
evidence of aggregate measurements implies that such measurements
are free of errors. We argue that this assumption does not hold. Even
physical measurements contain errors (Bergner,
2017). Accordingly, this
paper investigates ways to examine the reliability of measurements
derived from aggregating process data.
2 | LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 | The pros and cons of aggregation
Aggregation, known as item parcelling in latent variable modelling, refers
to using the sum or mean of two or more items as an observed mea-
surement of the construct of interest (Little et al., 2002). Aggregation is
widely used in social science because of its advantages in psychometric
properties and model estimation (Little et al.,
2002;L i t t l ee ta l . ,2013;
Matsunaga, 2008). Compared with item-level measurements, aggregate-
level measurements are more reliable and follow distributions closer to
normality and continuity. Latent variable models with aggregate-level
indicators are more parsimonious and stable and have fewer spurious
residual correlations and factor loadings. However, improper aggrega-
tion may lead to incorrect interpretation of construct dimensionality and
mask model misspecification. Thus, aggregation should be based on
careful consideration. Little et al. (
2002) suggested two key issues for
such consideration (dimensionality and research purpose), which we dis-
cuss in the context of aggregating process data in section 3.2.
2.2 | Measurements based on aggregating learning
process data
Process data represented as event sequences are common in LA, such
as action logs, think-aloud data, and eye movement data. Such data
contain rich information about the temporality of learning.
Researchers have suggested three types of measurements of tempo-
rality (Hadwin,
2021; Knight et al., 2017; Molenaar, 2014): (1) individ-
ual, (2) co-temporal, and (3) sequential characteristics. Individual
characteristics are the time-related characteristics of individual learn-
ing events (Knight et al.,
2017; Molenaar, 2014), such as the fre-
quency (how many times a particular event happens) and timing
(when a particular event occurs). Co-temporal characteristics refer to
multiple events co-occurring within a window, regardless of in which
order (Hadwin,
2021). In contrast, sequential characteristics, also
named temporal order, are concerned with the order of multiple
events in time (Chen et al.,
2018; Fan, Tan, et al., 2022). Examples are
patterns of ordered actions that frequently occur during an
educational game.
Regardless of the temporal characteristic of learning, aggregation
is often an essential step to derive meaningful measurements to sum-
marize the learning process. For individual characteristics, aggregation
produces the frequencies of individual events. For co-occurrence and
sequential characteristics, aggregation counts the frequencies of pat-
terns of events and uses the frequency to derive other measurements,
such as transition metrics, which quantify the tendency of one event
following another (Bosch & Paquette,
2021). The granularity of aggre-
gate measurements varies across research. Some studies have
aggregated the whole learning process, even though the process
lasted months (Cicchinelli et al.,
2018; Li et al., 2020). Other studies
have segmented the process into sessions and aggregated each ses-
sion (Fincham et al., 2018; Jovanovi /C19c et al., 2017). Nevertheless, few
studies have explicitly considered the rationales of such aggregation
(Winne,
2020). Moreover, the psychometric property of aggregate
measurement is hardly examined, leaving an implicit assumption that
the measurement is free of errors.
2.3 | Reliability in standard assessment
In standard assessment, reliability refers to the consistency of assess-
ment scores across multiple measures of the same construct (AERA
et al., 2014). Generally, there are two ways to express reliability – the
reliability coefficient and the standard error of measurement (SEM).
The reliability coefficient quantifies the consistency of assessment
scores by using an index of the amount of true variance operating in a
set of raw scores. SEM is an index of score differences due to mea-
surement errors. For test takers, it shows the average difference
between the observed scores and their “true” scores (scores without
any measurement error). This paper focuses on applying the reliability
coefficient to aggregate measurements of process data because it is
more widely used and familiar to LA researchers and more accessible
to compute than SEM.
One type of reliability coefficient is internal consistency, which
quantifies the extent to which assessment items measure the same
construct (Webb et al.,
2006). Coefficient α, sometimes named Cron-
bach's α, is often misinterpreted as a measure of internal consistency.
While it is related to internal consistency, it is heavily influenced by
1296 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

the number of items and is not a robust measure of internal consis-
tency (Cortina, 1993; Yang & Green, 2011). A measurement with low
internal consistency may show a high α due to many items. This is par-
ticularly relevant in the LA context because there are often many
events in a learning process, analogous to many items. Alternatives,
such as coefficient ω, have been recommended as a more robust mea-
sure of internal consistency (Flora,
2020; Hayes & Coutts, 2020).
Split-half reliability is another type of internal consistency mea-
sure (Thorndike & Thorndike-Christ, 2010). It is obtained by dividing
the assessment into equivalent halves (e.g., first and second halves as
well as odd and even halves) and correlating the scores from both
parts. A highly reliable assessment requires a high correlation, indicat-
ing the participant's scores are consistent on both halves of the
assessment.
Another type of reliability coefficient is test –retest reliability, on
the condition that the identical assessment is administrated on multi-
ple occasions, typically with a short interval between occasions
(Thorndike & Thorndike-Christ,
2010). According to Cronbach ( 1972)
and Thorndike ( 1947), the lasting and general aspects of test takers,
such as their ability, will contribute to the consistency of assessment
scores when the assessment is administered on different occasions.
By contrast, temporal and context-specific factors (e.g., noisy environ-
ment and possible disruptions from other test takers) cause transient
errors in assessment scores and undermine consistency
(Becker,
2000). Test –retest reliability coefficients account for tran-
sient errors, but internal consistency does not (Leppink & van
Merriënboer, 2015; Schmidt et al., 2003).
Common test –retest reliability coefficients are linear correlations
and intraclass correlations (ICC) (McGraw & Wong, 1996). Linear corre-
lations are limited to cases where an assessment is conducted on exactly
two occasions, while ICC applies to multiple occasions. There are multi-
ple versions of ICC, and readers may refer to McGraw and Wong (
1996)
as well as Koo and Li (2016) for the details of various versions.
3 | A FRAMEWORK OF AGGREGATING
PROCESS DATA
3.1 | Events as item responses
In standard psychological and educational assessments (e.g., aptitude
tests and personality and attitude scales), the basic measurement unit
is items/questions, and the construct of interest is inferred based on
subjects' responses to items (Mislevy et al., 2012). For instance, stu-
dents' responses to addition problems indicate their numeracy profi-
ciency. When we apply process data to measure constructs of
interest, the basic unit may be events (Reimann, 2009). We infer the
construct of interest based on the individual, co-occurrence, and
sequential characteristics of events. For instance, students' academic
procrastination has been operationalized as the interval between
when they start an assignment and when the assignment is released
(Huang et al.,
2021). This operationalization involves the timing char-
acteristic of the event of starting an assignment. Similarly, behavioural
engagement in digital learning environments has been inferred based
on the frequency of clicks and posts (Saqr & L /C19opez-Pernas, 2021). In
this sense, a learning event may be analogous to an item response
in standard assessment.
The response to a single item is unreliable because of item unique-
ness and measurement errors (Little et al., 2002;R u s h t o ne ta l . ,1983).
So is the characteristic of a single event (Winne, 2020). Moreover, the
measurement errors of events may be much larger because events in LA
usually naturally occur and are not intentionally triggered to measure a
construct. Taking procrastination as an example, we may not infer a stu-
dent's procrastination tendency based on the time that they started a
single assignment. Additional factors, such as a student's estimate of
time for the assignment, may influence the decision of when to start this
assignment and the interval between the starting time and the assign-
ment release time. However, within a week, the procrastination ten-
dency may be relatively stable across assignments, while the additional
factors may fluctuate. Aggregating the intervals across assignments may
mitigate the influence of the additional factors, and the aggregate inter-
val may be more indicative of procrastination. Thus, researchers usually
aggregate events over a period to reduce measurement errors and
improve reliability (e.g., Saqr & L /C19opez-Pernas,
2021). Nevertheless, the
warranty of such aggregation has not been explicitly examined, which
we discuss in the next section.
3.2 | Aggregation on process data
Little et al. (2002) suggested two key issues for the aggregation decision:
dimensionality and research purposes. Aggregation is warranted when
items involve the same construct or the same facet of a construct, but it
is risky when items involve different constructs or different facets of a
construct. Aggregation is beneficial when the research purpose is to
understand the latent construct and its relations with other constructs,
but it should be avoided if the purpose is to understand the relations
among items. Both issues may be mild in the context of aggregating pro-
cess data. First, the aggregation is usually conducted on events of the
same category. That is, an aggregate measurement is based on events
involving the same construct or the same facet of a construct. It is worth
noting that this property relies on the prerequisite that events are a valid
indicator of the construct. For example, when studying self-regulation, if
events indicative of evaluation are incorrectly classified as reflection, the
aggregate measurement of reflection would be a mixture of reflection
and evaluation events. Consequently, this measurement would be inva-
lid and its reliability would be meaningless.
For the second issue, LA researchers are interested in knowing
the relations between constructs and utilizing such understanding to
improve the learning process (Wise et al.,
2021) rather than the rela-
tions among individual events indicating these constructs. For
instance, it may be helpful to know whether students who usually
start assignments early will obtain higher average assignment scores
than those starting assignments near the deadline, but the relation
between the time of starting the first assignment and the score on this
assignment is trivial.
ZHANG ET AL . 1297
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

One issue not covered by Little et al.'s (2002) suggestion but critical
in process data is the temporal nature of the learning process. Process
data are generated over a period. The r eliability of aggregate measure-
ments may increase as the period becomes longer (in a more general
term, the analytic unit or granularity becomes coarser), given that longer
periods contain more events indicative of the same construct of interest,
and the construct is stable within the period. However, when the period
is relatively long, changes may occur in learning behaviours, which repre-
sents temporal within-subject variation (Saqr,
2023). Such variation can
be useful for understanding behavioural adaptation (Williams et al.,2021).
In terms of self-regulated learning, students can exercise human agency
in their learning and adapt behaviours based on learning goals and current
progress (Martin, 2004). The temporal variation in learning events may
capture behavioural adaptation (Greene et al.,2021). However, aggrega-
tion over a relatively long period will mask this temporal variation
(Winne,
2020), failing to reveal behavioural adaptation.
Distinguishing temporal variation and transient errors mentioned
in the discussion about test –retest reliability avoids confusion. Tran-
sient errors, in nature, are a special case of temporal variations. How-
ever, it is reasonable to assume that learning behaviours are stable
over a relatively short period. Within this period, the temporal varia-
tion in behaviours is transient errors (Schmidt et al.,
2003). In contrast,
assuming stable behaviours over a relatively long period may be
unreasonable. In such cases, temporal variation should be studied as it
may be significant and meaningful (Schmidt et al.,
2003). For example,
students starting the first assignment early may start the second
assignment early but be less likely to start the final assignment, taking
place months later, early as well.
Deciding the period for aggregation belongs to a more general
issue, that is, the granularity of the analytic unit. The proper granular-
ity and period for aggregation depend on research contexts and ques-
tions. In a course spreading over months, students' learning
behaviours may not significantly change within a few weeks
(Jovanovi/C19c et al.,
2017). By contrast, in an intense learning activity,
meaningful changes may occur in learning behaviours within hours.
For example, in a programming task of one hour, Berland et al. (
2013)
found that novices' programming activities generally went through
three phases: exploration, tinkering, and refinement.
Even when researchers are only interested in the overall relation-
ship between two constructs rather than their temporal trajectories,
longitudinal data analysis may produce more reliable results. The liter-
ature on longitudinal data analysis has well discussed this issue
(e.g., see chapter five in Weiss,
2005). As an illustration, Leppink and
van Merriënboer ( 2015) showed that aggregating the repeated
measurements of cognitive load might result in a failure to reveal the
positive effect of a supportive tool in lowering the cognitive load.
3.3 | Reporting evidence of reliability for
aggregate measurements
Regardless of the period length (more generally, the granularity), pro-
viding evidence of reliability for aggregate measurements would be
beneficial. Researchers have considered reliability for some aspects of
process data analysis. For example, when raw events are manually
coded into categories based on a theoretical framework, the inter-
rater agreement is provided as evidence of coding reliability
(e.g., Chen et al.,
2017). Similar attention to reliability should be
extended to aggregate measurements of process data. Here we out-
line approaches to estimating and reporting the reliability evidence of
aggregate measurements. Figure 1 displays the core recommendation
in a flow chart.
3.3.1 | Are the process data repeated
measurements?
The first point to consider is whether the process data are repeated
measurements, that is, whether events indicative of the same con-
struct can be viewed as the responses to the same item at different
time points or the responses to different items. In standard assess-
ments, repeated measurements mean that identical external stimuli
are presented to individuals. In LA, the learning condition is analogous
to the stimulus. What consists of the learning condition depends on
the construct of interest and the research context. For instance, in a
MOOC course, if the construct is behaviour engagement operationa-
lized as the action frequency, the learning condition may be conceptu-
alized as the course policy and learning topic. A policy awarding for
regular and frequent course activities incentivizes learners' actions,
and topics appealing to a learner motivates their actions. The policy is
generally stable throughout the course, but the topic may change each
week. Consequently, the action frequencies in different weeks are
more of responses to different items rather than the same item in dif-
ferent weeks. If the construct of interest is academic procrastination
operationalized as the interval between the assignment release and
submission, the learning condition may be the course policy, the time
of a day for releasing an assignment, and the allowed time window for
its completion. A policy awarding for early assignment completion
incentivizes early submission. Given the time window allowed for
completing an assignment, releasing it in the middle of the night
results in an interval between its release and deadline different from
releasing it at noon. If these conditions are consistent throughout a
course, it may be reasonable to treat the intervals between the release
and submission of different assignments as repeated responses to the
same item. Note that the treatment assumes that the difficulty and
complexity of assignments do not influence procrastination.
3.3.2 | Do different processes contain an equal
number of reliable events?
Regardless of whether process data are repeated measurements,
there are a few challenges for applying reliability coefficients to pro-
cess data. The most apparent one is that the lengths of processes
often vary across learners. For instance, the number of events in a
MOOC course varies across students in a fixed period. This means
1298 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

that the number of responses varies across students. Another chal-
lenge is that the measurement errors of individual events can be large
because the events in LA occur in a natural environment
(Winne, 2020), where many random factors may excite or inhibit their
occurrence. Computing reliability coefficients directly based on raw
events may underestimate the true reliability. If process data are not
repeated measurements, one more challenge is that events at the
same position in different processes may be responses to different
items. For instance, the second events of two students' learning pro-
cesses in a MOOC course may occur in weeks one and two, respec-
tively. Unless the learning condition is consistent in the two weeks,
the students' second events are not comparable.
To overcome the above challenges, we need to convert different
learners' process data to a fixed number of responses. One option is
segmenting the process that will be aggregated into bins and regard-
ing the measurement aggregated within a bin as a response. Bin-level
measurements are more reliable than individual events because the
influence of random factors may vary across events and be offset
mutually in the bin-level measurements. The segmenting should be
carefully carried out. Otherwise, variances unrelated to the construct
of interest may cause the measurements to be inconsistent across
bins and result in a poor reliability coefficient estimate. We propose
four segmenting approaches below, which are illustrated in Figure
2.
By order
The most straightforward method may be segmenting a process into
bins with equal lengths, that is, the same number of events
(e.g., Kinnebrew et al.,
2014). Alternatively, if different processes
cover the same clock-based units (e.g., hours and days), segmenting
can be done to create bins with equal intervals (e.g., one hour or one
day as a bin).
Random allocation
This method refers to randomly allocating an event into a bin until all
events are allocated. Different bins have equal lengths. To mitigate
the impact of randomness in allocating events, we need to repeat the
segmenting multiple times, compute the reliability estimate each time,
and report the average estimate.
Condition-representative sampling
This approach is a special form of random allocation. It is analogous to
stratified sampling and randomly allocates events occurring in the
same condition to a bin so that each bin is representative of all condi-
tions. This approach aims to ensure that the differences between bin-
level measurements are mainly because of random factors and not
heavily influenced by condition-specific effects (analogous to item-
specific effects in test theory; McDonald,
1999). If different bins
involve different conditions, the proportion of bin-level measurement
variances shared across bins would decrease (Little et al., 2002). This
issue may cause lower correlations between bin-level measurements
and poorer reliability estimates. Random allocation also implicitly con-
trols the condition-specific effect because the events in the same con-
dition may be randomly assigned to different bins.
For process data that are not repeat measurements, random allo-
cation and condition-representative sampling are recommended as
they control the potential condition-specific effect. For those that are
repeat measurements, by order with equal lengths or intervals is
recommended because the segmenting preserves the transient errors
FIGURE 1 Decision flow for
reporting reliability evidence of
aggregate measurements.
ZHANG ET AL . 1299
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

for each bin. Transient errors are “caused by momentary and nonre-
peating factors ” (Becker, 2000, p. 370). Preserving transient errors
allows researchers to evaluate how stable the measurements are
over time.
3.3.3 | Choosing the reliability coefficient
For process data that are not repeat measurements, the internal con-
sistency coefficient should be provided as evidence of its reliability.
We recommend coefficient ω because it has been widely recognized
as a more robust measure of internal consistency than coefficient α
(Flora,
2020; Hayes & Coutts, 2020), and tools for computing ω are
available in common data analysis platforms, such as OMEGA macro
for SPSS and SAS (Hayes & Coutts, 2020), the psych library in R, as
well as the reliabiliPy library in Python. Flora ( 2020) provides a tutorial
on selecting the proper version of ω. Alternatively, if the process data
are too short and can only be segmented into two bins, the split-half
correlation coefficient may be reported. However, obtaining an accu-
rate estimate of this coefficient may necessitate an enormous amount
of random segmenting (Parsons et al.,
2019).
For process data that are repeat measurements, test –retest reli-
ability coefficients should be reported since they account for transient
errors (Schmidt et al., 2003). If ICC is chosen, it is worth noting that
there are two distinct types of ICC: absolute agreement versus consis-
tency. ICC for consistency focuses on whether the rankings of individ-
uals' scores are consistent across occasions and does not regard the
systematic score differences between occasions (i.e., mean differ-
ences) as transient errors. ICC for absolute agreement assumes per-
fect consistency and regards the systematic differences as transient
errors. Consequently, within a dataset with high ICC for consistency,
ICC for absolute agreement may be low. Koo and Li (
2016) claim that
ICC for an absolute agreement should always be chosen for test –
retest reliability. We concur with Parsons et al.'s ( 2019) argument that
it is up to researchers to select the version of ICC based on the impor-
tance of the systematic differences within the specific research con-
text. This is relevant to process data because the change in learners'
internal states may cause a systematic change in learning behaviours.
For instance, it is well known that MOOC learners' engagement
decreases as the course progresses (Bote-Lorenzo & G /C19omez-
Sánchez,
2017). However, we may be interested in whether their
engagement rankings are consistent between adjacent weeks or
months. Beyond the above disagreement on ICC for absolute agree-
ment versus consistency, there is a consensus that ICC based on the
two-way mixed-effect model should be used for test –retest reliability
(Koo & Li,
2016; Parsons et al., 2019). Following McGraw and Wong's
(1996) notions, we used ICC(A, k) and ICC(C, k) to denote ICC based
on the two-way mixed-effect model for absolute agreement and con-
sistency, respectively.
3.4 | Summary
This section presents a framework for aggregating process data, which
argues that events in learning processes are analogous to item
responses but more unreliable. Aggregating events within a proper
period are recommended to obtain more reliable measurements of
constructs of interest. We recommend reporting reliability evidence
for aggregate measurements, regardless of the period length. A gen-
eral guideline is proposed for selecting the appropriate reliability
FIGURE 2 An illustration of segmenting methods.
1300 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

coefficient and computing the estimate for aggregate measurements.
Note that the guideline is not ultimate. Researchers should choose
the reliability coefficient based on the research purpose and context.
The next section illustrates the framework by applying it to compute
the reliability estimates of aggregate measurements in the context of
an introductory computer science course.
4 | CASE STUDY: AGGREGATE
MEASUREMENTS OF ACADEMIC
PROCRASTINATION AND PROGRAMMING
PROFICIENCY
This section extracts aggregate measurements of academic procrastina-
tion and programming proficiency from submission sequences of com-
puter programming assignments. We applied the proposed framework
to compute reliability estimates to illustrate: (1) aggregate measure-
ments are more reliable than individual events; (2) two events or mea-
surements with a long period between them are weakly related and not
suitable for aggregation; (3) how to segment event sequences; (4) how
different segmenting approaches cause distinct estimates of reliability.
4.1 | Data and participants
Data were collected from an undergraduate introductory computer
science course at a public university in the U.S. during the Fall 2019
semester. Six hundred and seventeen students completed the course
and approved using their assignment data for research purposes.
Among them, 30% were female, 69% were male, and 1% preferred
not to report their gender. 81% were first-year students, and 45%
were in a CS-related major.
The course taught Java programming and lasted 15 weeks. A web-
based, problem-driven learning system hosted all homework assign-
ments, lab exercises, and exams. The learning system released a minor
programming assignment each weekday. Students had 24 h to submit
solutions to an assignment after its release. The system automatically
graded the submission and provided feedback if the submission had
errors (e.g., syntactic and semantic errors). Students could submit unlim-
ited times to reach a correct solution and obtain full credits within 24 h.
After this period, students could still submit solutions but would not
receive credit. There were 68 assignments in total. The learning system
automatically recorded the code, date, correctness, and error feedback
of all student submissions. We used the submission sequences to
extract measurements of academic procrastination and programming
proficiency and examined the measurement reliability.
4.2 | The reliability of aggregate measurements of
academic procrastination
Academic procrastination is delaying an academic task toward the
deadline or a failure to complete it before the deadline (Schraw
et al., 2007). Two operationalizations have been used in technology-
enhanced learning environments: (1) whether an assignment is com-
pleted before the deadline (Huang et al.,
2021); (2) the interval
between the time of releasing an assignment and the time students
starting the assignment (Zhang et al., 2022). This study only adopted
the second operationalization, given that the purpose is to illustrate
the reliability of aggregate measurements. If a student did not start an
assignment before the deadline, this student's procrastination in this
assignment was set to be 24 h.
The course policy did not change over time, and all assignments
were released at midnight. Thus, we regarded the learning condition
as consistent throughout the course and viewed the time students
started different assignments as repeated responses to the same pro-
crastination item. Each student showed 68 responses. We firstly com-
puted ICC(A, k) and ICC(C, k) of procrastination measurements
aggregated over 2 –34 responses to illustrate how the reliability chan-
ged as the period being aggregated lengthened and the difference
between ICC(A, k) and ICC(C, k). We then compared the test –retest
reliability of individual procrastination responses and week-level pro-
crastination measurements.
4.2.1 | Results
Figure 3 shows that ICC(A, k) was slightly lower than ICC(C, k). This is
expected as ICC(C, k) did not treat systematic differences between
responses as transient errors. Both types of ICC increased as the num-
ber of procrastination responses being aggregated increased. Notably,
from two to four responses, the average ICC(A, k) rose from 0.59 to
0.74, and the average ICC(C, k) rose from 0.62 to 0.76. After that, the
growth rate of both ICC slowed down, indicating a diminishing benefit
of aggregation. When the number of responses reached five, which
was the number of assignments in most weeks, the average ICC(A, k)
and ICC(C, k) were 0.76 and 0.78, indicating moderate to good reliabil-
ity. Figure
4 clearly shows that the ICC of week-level indicators was
higher than individual responses. Overall, these results suggest that
aggregation over a short period improved the reliability of procrastina-
tion measurements.
Figure 5 depicts the correlations among individual responses
(upper right) and week-level aggregate measurements of procrastina-
tion (lower left). 1 The farther away from the main diagonal a cell is,
the lighter its shade is, indicating the diminishing associations among
individual responses or aggregate measurements over time. For exam-
ple, the average correlation between the individual responses within
week 1 (A1 –A5) was 0.31. By contrast, the average correlation was
0.22 between the individual responses of weeks 1 and 7 (A33 –A37)
and 0.14 between that of weeks 1 and 14 (A64 –A68). The average
correlation between adjacent week-level measurements was 0.73,
while the average correlation between measurements with an interval
of 7 weeks (e.g., week 1 and week 8, week 2 and week 9) was 0.51.
1Procrastination on A41 and A42 had a high correlation because these assignments were
released at the same day.
ZHANG ET AL . 1301
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

Overall, the results suggest the instability of procrastination behaviour
over long periods and the importance of selecting the appropriate
period for aggregation.
4.3 | The reliability of aggregate measurements of
programming proficiency
Programming proficiency is not a unidimensional construct, as com-
pleting a program entails various skills (Xie et al., 2019). The current
study used four dimensions of programming proficiency to illustrate
segmenting event sequences to compute the reliability of aggregate
measurements: programming syntactic, programming semantic, syn-
tactic error debugging, and semantic error debugging proficiency.
Research has used the proportion of submissions to programming
assignments containing syntax errors as a measurement of syntax pro-
ficiency (Zhang et al.,
2023). We adopted this operationalization but
acknowledged that this measurement might be just a facet of syntac-
tic proficiency. Similarly, we operationalized (1) semantic proficiency
as the proportion of submissions containing semantic errors, (2) syn-
tactic debugging proficiency as the proportion of submission pairs
where the second submission fixed at least one syntax error in the
first submission, (3) semantic error debugging proficiency as the pro-
portion of submission pairs where the second submission fixed at
least one semantic error in the first submission.
Because students' programming proficiency was likely to develop
throughout the course, we only used submission sequences in the last
three weeks. We assumed that the growth rate of programming profi-
ciency was relatively slow at the end of the course and that program-
ming proficiency might be stable within a week. Thus, we computed the
four programming proficiency indicators within each of the three weeks.
As a validation, we correlated the week-level measurement with the
final exam scores. The correlations were weak to moderate ( r ranges
from /C00.52 to 0.30, with the average absolute value of 0.21, and all
p < 0.01 after Bonferroni correction except for two correlations).
Even in the same week, assignments might differ in syntax and
semantic complexity and involve different programming constructs.
Thus, submissions were more of responses on different items rather
than repeated responses on the same item. The number of submissions
per student per week ranged from 10 to 420. Based on Figure
1,w e
segmented each submission sequence using both random allocation and
condition-representative approaches. In the current context, the condi-
tion was programming assignments. We also segmented submission
sequences by order with equal intervals and lengths to illustrate the
condition-specific effect on the reliability estimate. All segmenting
approaches split a sequence into three bins, and coefficient ω was com-
puted. Since there was no assignment on either of Monday and Tuesday
as well as Thursday and Friday in the last three weeks, the equal interval
method allocated Monday and Tuesday to the 1st bin, Wednesday to
the 2nd bin, as well as Thursday and Friday to the 3rd bin.
4.3.1 | Results
Figure 6 presents the ω estimates of aggregate measurements based
on different segmenting methods. Because random allocation and
condition-representative methods involve a random process (ran-
domly assigning submissions to bins), we repeated each method
FIGURE 3 The average reliability estimates at each number of responses.
FIGURE 4 ICC of individual responses and week-level
procrastination indicators.
1302 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

100 times and reported the average estimates. The estimates based
on the two methods were close to each other. As expected, these
estimates were higher than those based on the equal interval and
equal length methods. The ω estimates based on the equal interval
were quite low, suggesting substantial condition-specific effects. The
estimates of this method were lower than those of equal length.
The reason was that a student usually made a different number of
submissions on different assignments. Two bins derived from equal
length might contain submissions on the same assignment (see
Figure
2), but two bins derived from equal interval did not. Thus, the
condition-specific effect was less severe in the equal length method
than in the equal interval method.
The correlations among bin-level indicators of the same week
(Figure 7) further illustrated the condition-specific effects. Generally,
these correlations based on the equal interval method were lower
than those of equal length, which in turn were lower than random
allocation and condition-representative methods.
5 | DISCUSSION
Aggregating process data is a common practice in LA. This paper
explores the pros and cons of this practice in terms of psychometrics.
We argue that aggregate measurements over a relatively short period
FIGURE 5 The Linear correlations among individual responses (upper right) and week-level aggregate measurements (lower left)
ZHANG ET AL . 1303
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

are more reliable than individual events, but aggregation over a rela-
tively long period may mask meaningful changes in learning behav-
iours and should be avoided. The main contributions of this study are
twofold: (1) we presented a general guideline for computing reliability
metrics; (2) we conducted a case study to demonstrate the guideline.
More broadly, this paper may foster the development of standards for
rigour in LA research (Knight et al.,
2019), mainly statistical and psy-
chometric rigour.
5.1 | Interpreting reliability coefficients
Reliability coefficients quantify the proportion of random errors in the
observed measurement. There is no universal threshold that we can
use to assign a qualitative label to measurements, such as “poor” or
“adequate”. Taking ICC as an example, a widely adopted guideline is
that ICC values smaller than 0.5, between 0.5 and 0.75, between 0.75
and 0.9, and greater than 0.9 indicate poor, moderate, good, and
FIGURE 6 Omega of programming proficiency indicators computed by different segmenting methods. Error bars represent the ±1 standard
deviations of ω estimates in the 100 repetitions for random allocation and condition-representative. The estimates were missing for equal interval
and length methods in a few cases because the confirmatory factor model could not converge.
FIGURE 7 Linear correlations among bin-level programming proficiency indicators of the same week. Random: random allocation. Condition:
condition-representative.
1304 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

excellent reliability (Koo & Li, 2016). However, as the authors of this
guideline warn, “there are no standard values for acceptable reliability
using ICC” (Koo & Li, 2016, p. 158). For instance, a recent study found
that the median ICC of 37 behavioural tasks for measuring self-
regulation was only 0.311 (Enkavi et al., 2019). Based on the guide-
line, over half of these behavioural tasks would be regarded as poor in
test–retest reliability. However, the reason for low ICC may be that
behavioural tasks are often selected for generating scores with low
between-subject variance (Hedge et al.,
2018) rather than that these
behavioural tasks are truly unreliable. Therefore, compared with inter-
preting a reliability estimate based on a general threshold or guideline,
the interpretation would be more meaningful when it is situated in
the domain-specific spectrum of the estimates (Parsons et al.,
2019),
which should cover various samples and learning environments. Nev-
ertheless, establishing the spectrum relies on a LA research culture
where reporting reliability estimates for aggregate measurements of
process data is a standard practice.
5.2 | Handling aggregate measurements with low
reliability
Assuming that the guideline is applicable, when an aggregate mea-
surement has a low reliability estimate, say 0.5, researchers may
lengthen the period aggregated to increase the reliability, as sug-
gested by Figure
3. However, we want to highlight the “embracing
imperfection” notion in LA (Kitto et al., 2018). LA is an interdisciplin-
ary community. The implicit assumption of psychometrics that
improving measurement reliability is a worthy effort may not always
hold in LA. In cases where increasing the period aggregated would
mask behavioural adaptation in learning, it may be acceptable to
embrace an imperfect measurement.
To maintain the psychometric rigour, instead of lengthening the
period aggregated, we recommend reinspecting the assumption that
the construct of interest is stable within the period. Researchers may
examine this assumption by conducting a paired-sample t-test or
repeated analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare the measurements
of different bins. If the assumption does not hold, decomposing the
period may be considered. If the assumption holds, it means that even
though the construct of interest is stable, there are still non-negligible
measurement errors. Then, latent variable modelling can be used to
account for the measurement errors in the analyses of the aggregate
measurements and their relationships with other variables (Skrondal &
Rabe-Hesketh,
2004).
5.3 | Practical implications
Beyond the potential of improving LA research practice, this study has
implications for designing learning dashboards, specifically for design-
ing action-related indicators (Schwendimann et al., 2017). These indi-
cators usually show users aggregate information about learners'
actions for self-monitoring, monitoring peers, or administrative
monitoring. No matter for which purpose, the period being aggregated
should not be too short; otherwise, the indicator would be unreliable
and contain so much noise that regulation effort and feedback based
on them would be inappropriate. Meanwhile, the period should not be
too long to hide temporal patterns in learners' activities. In addition,
indicators aggregated over a long period may not accurately reflect
learners' current cognitive, motivational, and affective states. Instruc-
tional interventions based on such indicators may be ineffective due
to low adaptivity (Aleven et al.,
2017).
5.4 | Limitations and future directions
The current study focuses on the reliability of measurements derived
from learning process data. We do not advocate simply pursuing high
reliability because other measurement issues, such as validity and gen-
eralization, hold the same importance. A measurement with high reli-
ability in a particular context does not imply that it is a valid indicator
of the construct of interest and that it generalizes to another context.
Indeed, Du et al. (
2023) found that generalization and validity are two
key challenges in using process data to measure self-regulated learn-
ing. Further research is suggested to provide reliability evidence as
well as validity and generalization evidence for aggregate measure-
ments of process data.
Some aggregate measurements that characterize the co-
occurrence and sequential characteristics of events are association
strength metrics, such as transition metrics, which quantify the ten-
dency of one event following another (Bosch & Paquette,
2021).
Regression models can estimate and account for their measurement
errors (Matayoshi & Karumbaiah, 2021). Thus, it may be unnecessary
to apply the proposed method for computing the reliability coeffi-
cients of these measurements.
Deciding the period length or granularity for aggregation relies on
the research questions and contexts. Identifying the best length will
maximize the reliability of measurements and minimize the risk of
masking changes in learning behaviours. However, it may be challeng-
ing to identify the best length. There are methods for determining the
minimum observations for deriving an aggregate measurement that is
stable and representative of the population (Hehman et al.,
2018).
Such methods cannot directly apply to process data in LA because the
aggregation is over subjects rather than responses from the same sub-
jects. Alternatively, researchers may plot the reliability metrics against
the length of the aggregated period, like in Figure
3, and identify the
length point after which the increasing rate of reliability metrics slows
down. However, it may be challenging to identify such a point, and
the period length at this point may be large (e.g., 20 responses in
Figure
3). Further research is needed to investigate the utility of this
method and develop other techniques for determining the best length
for aggregation.
Random allocation and condition-representative segmenting
demand repetitions to reduce biases caused by randomness. The
100 repetitions for computing the reliability estimates of program-
ming proficiency took one hour. A guideline for the minimum
ZHANG ET AL . 1305
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

repetitions avoids unnecessary repetitions and saves time. Yet, vari-
ous features of the data, such as the process length, the reliability of
individual events, and the variation in the learning conditions, may
influence the minimum repetitions. It entails extensive simulation
experiments and empirical data analyses to yield the guideline.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Yingbin Zhang: Conceptualization; methodology; formal analysis;
writing – review and editing; writing – original draft; visualization;
investigation; project administration; resources; supervision. Yafei Ye:
Conceptualization; methodology; writing – review and editing;
writing – original draft; investigation. Luc Paquette: Conceptualiza-
tion; methodology; writing – review and editing; supervision; funding
acquisition; project administration; resources. Yibo Wang: Methodol-
ogy; writing – review and editing; formal analysis. Xiaoyong Hu: Con-
ceptualization; writing – review and editing; resources.
FUNDING INFORMATION
This work was supported by National Science Foundation (grant num-
bers 1942962).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The use of the data in this study for research purposes was approved
by the Institutional Review Boards (IRB) of the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
ORCID
Yingbin Zhang
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2664-3093
Yafei Ye https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3446-7085
Luc Paquette https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2738-3190
REFERENCES
AERA, APA, & NCME. (2014). Standards for educational and psychological
testing (7th ed.). American Educational Research Association.
Aleven, V., McLaughlin, E. A., Glenn, R. A., & Koedinger, K. R. (2017).
Instruction based on adaptive learning technologies. In R. E. Mayer &
P. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook of research on learning and instruction
(pp. 522–560). Routledge.
Becker, G. (2000). How important is transient error in estimating reliabil-
ity? Going beyond simulation studies. Psychological Methods , 5(3),
370–379. https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.5.3.370
Bergner, Y. (2017). Measurement and its uses in learning analytics. In C.
Lang, G. Siemens, A. Wise, & D. Gasevic (Eds.), Handbook of learning
analytics. Society for Learning Analytics Research. https://doi.org/10.
18608/hla17.003
Berland, M., Martin, T., Benton, T., Petrick Smith, C., & Davis, D. (2013).
Using learning analytics to understand the learning pathways of novice
programmers. Journal of the Learning Sciences , 22(4), 564–599. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10508406.2014.954750
Bosch, N., & Paquette, L. (2021). What ’ s next? Sequence length and
impossible loops in state transition measurement. Journal of Educa-
tional Data Mining , 13(1), 1 –23. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
5048423
Bote-Lorenzo, M. L., & G /C19omez-Sánchez, E. (2017). Predicting the decrease
of engagement indicators in a MOOC. In Proceedings of the seventh
international learning analytics & knowledge conference (pp. 143 –147).
ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/3027385.3027387
Chen, B., Knight, S., & Wise, A. F. (2018). Critical issues in designing and
implementing temporal analytics. Journal of Learning Analytics , 5(1), 1 –
9. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2018.53.1
Chen, B., Resendes, M., Chai, C. S., & Hong, H. (2017). Two tales of time:
Uncovering the significance of sequential patterns among contribution
types in knowledge-building discourse. Interactive Learning Environ-
ments, 25(2), 162 –175. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2016.
1276081
Cicchinelli, A., Veas, E., Pardo, A., Pammer-Schindler, V., Fessl, A.,
Barreiros, C., & Lindstädt, S. (2018). Finding traces of self-regulated
learning in activity streams. In Proceedings of the 8th international con-
ference on learning analytics and knowledge (pp. 191 –200). ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3170358.3170381
Cortina, J. M. (1993). What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory
and applications. Journal of Applied Psychology , 78(1), 98–104. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0021-9010.78.1.98
Cronbach, L. J. (1972). The dependability of behavioral measurements: The-
ory of generalizability scores and profiles . John Wiley.
Cui, Y., Chen, F., Shiri, A., & Fan, Y. (2019). Predictive analytic models of
student success in higher education. Information and Learning Science ,
120(3/4), 208–227. https://doi.org/10.1108/ILS-10-2018-0104
Du, J., Hew, K. F., & Liu, L. (2023). What can online traces tell us about stu-
dents' self-regulated learning? A systematic review of online trace data
analysis. Computers & Education , 201, 104828.
https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.compedu.2023.104828
Enkavi, A. Z., Eisenberg, I. W., Bissett, P. G., Mazza, G. L.,
MacKinnon, D. P., Marsch, L. A., & Poldrack, R. A. (2019). Large-scale
analysis of test –retest reliabilities of self-regulation measures. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116(12), 5472–5477.
https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1818430116
Fan, Y., Tan, Y., Rakovi /C19c, M., Wang, Y., Cai, Z., Shaffer, D. W., & Ga ˇsevi/C19c, D.
(2022). Dissecting learning tactics in MOOC using ordered network
analysis. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 39(1), 154 –166.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12735
Fan, Y., van der Graaf, J., Lim, L., Rakovi /C19c, M., Singh, S., Kilgour, J.,
Moore, J., Molenaar, I., Bannert, M., & Ga ˇsevi/C19c, D. (2022). Towards
investigating the validity of measurement of self-regulated learning
based on trace data. Metacognition and Learning , 17, 949–987.
https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11409-022-09291-1
Fincham, O. E., Gasevic, D. V., Jovanovic, J. M., & Pardo, A. (2018). From
study tactics to learning strategies: An analytical method for extracting
interpretable representations. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technolo-
gies, 12(1), 59–72.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2018.2823317
Flora, D. B. (2020). Your coefficient alpha is probably wrong, but which
coefficient omega is right? A tutorial on using r to obtain better reli-
ability estimates. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological
Science, 3(4), 484–501.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245920951747
Gray, G., & Bergner, Y. (2022). A practitioner's guide to measurement in
learning analytics: Decisions, opportunities, and challenges. In C. Lang,
G. Siemens, A. F. Wise, D. Ga ˇsevi/C19c, & A. Merceron (Eds.), Handbook of
learning analytics (2ed ed., pp. 20 –28). SoLAR. https://doi.org/10.
18608/hla22.002
Greene, J. A., Plumley, R. D., Urban, C. J., Bernacki, M. L., Gates, K. M.,
Hogan, K. A., Demetriou, C., & Panter, A. T. (2021). Modeling temporal
self-regulatory processing in a higher education biology course. Learn-
ing and Instruction , 72, 101201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.
2019.04.002
1306 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

Hadwin, A. F. (2021). Commentary and future directions: What can multi-
modal data reveal about temporal and adaptive processes in self-
regulated learning? Learning and Instruction , 72, 101287.
https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2019.101287
Hayes, A. F., & Coutts, J. J. (2020). Use omega rather than Cronbach's
alpha for estimating reliability. But …. Communication Methods and
Measures, 14(1), 1 –24. https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2020.
1718629
Hedge, C., Powell, G., & Sumner, P. (2018). The reliability paradox: Why
robust cognitive tasks do not produce reliable individual differences.
Behavior Research Methods , 50(3), 1166 –1186.
https://doi.org/10.
3758/s13428-017-0935-1
Hehman, E., Xie, S. Y., Ofosu, E. K., & Nespoli, G. (2018). Assessing the
point at which averages are stable: A tool illustrated in the context of
person perception. PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/2n6jq
Huang, N., Zhang, J., Burtch, G., Li, X., & Chen, P. (2021). Combating pro-
crastination on massive online open courses via optimal calls to action.
Information Systems Research , 32(2), 301 –317.
https://doi.org/10.
1287/isre.2020.0974
J i a n g ,Y . ,B o s c h ,N . ,B a k e r ,R .S . ,P a q u e t t e ,L . ,O c u m p a u g h ,J . ,
Andres, J. M. A. L., Moore, A. L., & Biswas, G. (2018). Expert feature-
engineering vs. deep neural networks: Which is better for sensor-
free affect detection. In C. P. Rosé, R. Martínez-Maldonado, H. U.
Hoppe, R. Luckin, M. Mavrikis, K. Porayska-Pomsta, B. McLaren, &
B. du Boulay (Eds.), Proceedings of the 19th international conference
on artificial intelligence in educat ion. Lecture notes in computer science
(Vol. 10947, pp. 198 –211). Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-93843-1_15
Jovanovi/C19c, J., Ga ˇsevi/C19c, D., Dawson, S., Pardo, A., & Mirriahi, N. (2017).
Learning analytics to unveil learning strategies in a flipped classroom.
The Internet and Higher Education , 33,7 4 –85.
https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.iheduc.2017.02.001
Kinnebrew, J. S., Segedy, J. R., & Biswas, G. (2014). Analyzing the temporal
evolution of students' behaviors in open-ended learning environments.
Metacognition and Learning , 9(2), 187 –215.
https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11409-014-9112-4
Kitto, K., Shum, S. B., & Gibson, A. (2018). Embracing imperfection in learn-
ing analytics. In Proceedings of the 8th international conference on
learning analytics and knowledge (pp. 451 –460). ACM. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3170358.3170413
Knight, S., Wise, A., & Ochoa, X. (2019). Fostering an impactful field of
learning analytics. Journal of Learning Analytics , 6(3), 1 –4. https://doi.
org/10.18608/jla.2019.63.1
Knight, S., Wise, A. F., & Chen, B. (2017). Time for change: Why learning
analytics needs temporal analysis. Journal of Learning Analytics , 4(3), 7–
17. https://doi.org/10.18608/jla.2017.43.2
Koo, T. K., & Li, M. Y. (2016). A guideline of selecting and reporting intra-
class correlation coefficients for reliability research. Journal of Chiro-
practic Medicine , 15(2), 155 –163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcm.2016.
02.012
Leppink, J., & van Merriënboer, J. J. G. (2015). The beast of aggregating
cognitive load measures in technology-based learning. Journal of Edu-
cational Technology & Society , 18(4), 230–245.
Li, S., Du, H., Xing, W., Zheng, J., Chen, G., & Xie, C. (2020). Examining
temporal dynamics of self-regulated learning behaviors in STEM learn-
ing: A network approach. Computers & Education , 158, 103987.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103987
Little, T. D., Cunningham, W. A., Shahar, G., & Widaman, K. F. (2002). To
parcel or not to parcel: Exploring the question, weighing the merits.
Structural Equation Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal , 9(2), 151–173.
https://doi.org/10.1207/S15328007SEM0902_1
Little, T. D., Rhemtulla, M., Gibson, K., & Schoemann, A. M. (2013). Why
the items versus parcels controversy needn't be one? Psychological
Methods, 18(3), 285–300. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033266
Martin, J. (2004). Self-regulated learning, social cognitive theory, and
agency. Educational Psychologist , 39(2), 135 –145. https://doi.org/10.
1207/s15326985ep3902_4
Matayoshi, J., & Karumbaiah, S. (2021). Using marginal models to adjust
for statistical bias in the analysis of state transitions. In Proceedings of
the 11th international conference on learning analytics and knowledge
(pp. 449–455). ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3448139.3448182
Matsunaga, M. (2008). Item parceling in structural equation modeling: A
primer. Communication Methods and Measures , 2(4), 260 –293. https://
doi.org/10.1080/19312450802458935
McDonald, R. P. (1999). Test theory: A unified treatment . Psychology Press.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410601087
McGraw, K. O., & Wong, S. P. (1996). Forming inferences about some
intraclass correlation coefficients. Psychological Methods , 1(1), 30 –46.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-989X.1.1.30
Mislevy, R. J., Behrens, J. T., Dicerbo, K. E., & Levy, R. (2012). Design and
discovery in educational assessment: Evidence-centered design, psy-
chometrics, and educational data mining. Journal of Educational Data
Mining, 4(1), 11–48.
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3554641
Molenaar, I. (2014). Advances in temporal analysis in learning and instruc-
tion. Frontline Learning Research , 2(4), 15 –24. https://doi.org/10.
14786/flr.v2i4.118
Motz, B., Quick, J., Schroeder, N., Zook, J., & Gunkel, M. (2019). The valid-
ity and utility of activity logs as a measure of student engagement. In
Proceedings of the ninth international conference on learning analytics &
knowledge (pp. 300 –309). ACM.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3303772.
3303789
Munshi, A., Biswas, G., Baker, R., Ocumpaugh, J., Hutt, S., & Paquette, L.
(2023). Analysing adaptive scaffolds that help students develop self-
regulated learning behaviours. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning ,
39(2), 351–368.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12761
Parsons, S., Kruijt, A., & Fox, E. (2019). Psychological science needs a stan-
dard practice of reporting the reliability of cognitive-behavioral mea-
surements. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science ,
2(4), 378–395. https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245919879695
Reimann, P. (2009). Time is precious: Variable- and event-centred
approaches to process analysis in CSCL research. International Journal
of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning , 4(3), 239 –257. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11412-009-9070-z
Rushton, J. P., Brainerd, C. J., & Pressley, M. (1983). Behavioral develop-
ment and construct validity: The principle of aggregation. Psychological
Bulletin, 94(1), 18–38. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.94.1.18
Saqr, M. (2023). Modelling within-person idiographic variance could help
explain and individualize learning. British Journal of Educational Tech-
nology, 54, 1077–1094. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13309
Saqr, M., & L /C19opez-Pernas, S. (2021). The longitudinal trajectories of online
engagement over a full program. Computers & Education , 175, 104325.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2021.104325
Schmidt, F. L., Le, H., & Ilies, R. (2003). Beyond alpha: An empirical exami-
nation of the effects of different sources of measurement error on reli-
ability estimates for measures of individual differences constructs.
Psychological Methods , 8(2), 206 –224.
https://doi.org/10.1037/1082-
989x.8.2.206
Schraw, G., Wadkins, T., & Olafson, L. (2007). Doing the things we do: A
grounded theory of academic procrastination. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 99(1), 12–25. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.99.1.12
Schwendimann, B. A., Rodríguez-Triana, M. J., Vozniuk, A., Prieto, L. P.,
Boroujeni, M. S., Holzer, A., Gillet, D., & Dillenbourg, P. (2017). Per-
ceiving learning at a glance: A systematic literature review of learning
dashboard research. IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies , 10(1),
30–41.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2016.2599522
Skrondal, A., & Rabe-Hesketh, S. (2004). Generalized latent variable model-
ing: Multilevel, longitudinal, and structural equation models . Chapman
and Hall/CRC. https://doi.org/10.1201/9780203489437
ZHANG ET AL . 1307
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

---PAGE---

Thorndike, R. L. (1947). Research problems and techniques (report No. 3).
Army air forces aviation psychology program research reports #3 .U S
Government Printing Office.
Thorndike, R. M., & Thorndike-Christ, T. (2010). Measurement and evalua-
tion in psychology and education (8th ed.). Pearson.
Webb, N. M., Shavelson, R. J., & Haertel, E. H. (2006). 4 reliability coeffi-
cients and generalizability theory. In C. R. Rao & S. Sinharay (Eds.),
Handbook of statistics (Vol. 26, pp. 81 –124). Elsevier.
https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0169-7161(06)26004-8
Weiss, R. E. (2005). Modeling longitudinal data (Vol. 1). Springer.
Williams, D. R., Mulder, J., Rouder, J. N., & Rast, P. (2021). Beneath the
surface: Unearthing within-person variability and mean relations with
Bayesian mixed models. Psychological Methods , 26(1), 74 –89.
https://
doi.org/10.1037/met0000270
Winne, P. H. (2020). Construct and consequential validity for learning ana-
lytics based on trace data. Computers in Human Behavior , 112, 106457.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.106457
Wise, A. F., Knight, S., & Ochoa, X. (2021). What makes learning analytics
research matter. Journal of Learning Analytics , 8(3), 1 –9. https://doi.
org/10.18608/jla.2021.7647
Xie, B., Loksa, D., Nelson, G. L., Davidson, M. J., Dong, D., Kwik, H.,
Tan, A. H., Hwa, L., Li, M., & Ko, A. J. (2019). A theory of instruction for
introductory programming skills. Computer Science Education , 29(2–3),
205–253.
https://doi.org/10.1080/08993408.2019.1565235
Yang, Y., & Green, S. B. (2011). Coeffici ent alpha: A reliability coeffi-
c i e n tf o rt h e2 1 s tc e n t u r y ?Journal of Psychoeducational Assess-
ment, 29(4), 377 –392. https://doi.org/10.1177/073428291140
6668
Zhang, J., Cunningham, T., Iyer, R., Baker, R., & Fouh, E. (2022). Exploring
the impact of voluntary practice and procrastination in an introductory
programming course. In Proceedings of the 53rd ACM technical sympo-
sium on computer science education (pp. 356 –361). ACM.
https://doi.
org/10.1145/3478431.3499350
Zhang, Y., Paquette, L., Pinto, J. D., & Fan, A. X. (2023). Utilizing
programming traces to explore and model the dimensions of
novices' code-writing skill. Computer Applications in Engineering
Education , 31(4), 1041 –1058.
https://doi.org/10.1002/cae.22622
How to cite this article: Zhang, Y., Ye, Y., Paquette, L., Wang,
Y., & Hu, X. (2024). Investigating the reliability of aggregate
measurements of learning process data: From theory to
practice. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 40(3),
1295–1308.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12951
1308 ZHANG ET AL .
 13652729, 2024, 3, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcal.12951 by South China Normal University, Wiley Online Library on [16/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License